&
>

Ps

2

2, age

Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http:/Avww.dilg.com.ph

22 February 2021

HON. REYNALDO N. GUECO
Punong Barangay
Malabanias, Angeles City

Dear Punong Barangay Gueco:

This has reference to your letter dated 14 December 2020 requesting
this Department’s opinion on the following issues, which we quoted in fofo:

1. Whether or not the barangay ordinance which was passed
two (2) years earlier than the city ordinance has the full force
and effect of law;

2. Whether or not the city ordinance can arrogate unto the City
Treasurer’s office the collection of barangay fees and
business clearances, service fees and other charges
considering that local collection of fees fall squarely on the
Barangays in accordance with the Local Government Code;
and

3. Whether or not the schedule of fees contained in the
barangay ordinance can validly disregarded by the city
council as opposed to the city ordinance, without taking into
account the ranking and classifications of barangays under
its jurisdiction.

Based on your letter and its attachments, on 26 October 2018, the
Sangguniang Barangay of Malabanias, Angeles City has enacted Barangay
Ordinance No. 03 series of 2018, otherwise known as “The Tax and Revenue
Cod of Barangay Malabanias 2018”. Chapter Il, Article 2, Section 5 of the
said Ordinance provides:
“Chapter 2 Barangay Business Tax

XXX

Article 2. Collection of taxes, fees, charges and other charges-
The Barangay Treasurer shall collect all taxes levied under this
Ordinance. He may not delegate the collection of said taxes
unless authorized by the Sangguniang Barangay.

XXX

Sec. 5 Collection of Local Revenues by the Barangay Treasurer-
All barangay taxes, fees and charges shall be collected by the
barangay treasurer and may not delegate the collection of said
revenues unless authorized by the Sanggunian Barangay.”

On 29 October 2020, the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Angeles
enacted City Ordinance No. 562 series of 2020, otherwise known as “The
Unified Business Permit Processing Ordinance of Angeles City’ which is
aimed at, among others, streamlining the procurement of business permits,
centralizing the processing and collection of business permit fees, and
providing a uniform collection scheme in the permit fees imposed on
businesses.

In essence, the aforesaid City Ordinance empowers the Business
Permit and Licensing Division of Angeles City, thru its City Assessor, to
identify the specific barangay jurisdiction of businesses and authorizes the
City Treasurer to collect fees on barangay business clearance required for
mayor's permits. Section 6 thereof provides:

“SECTION 6. COLLECTION OF BARANGAY BUSINESS
CLEARANCE FEES- All barangay business clearances shall be
processed solely by the Business Permit and Licensing Division
of the Angeles City Hall. The payments for procurement of such
clearances shall be collected by the City Treasurer. The City
Accountant shall prepare the statements relating to the barangay
permit fees for proper remittance to the respective barangays to
which the fees collected pertain to. Xxx”

Hence, your queries.
It appears that the questions proffered herein ultimately hinge on
whether or not the city, thru its treasurer, may collect barangay business
clearance fees?

In reply thereto, attention is respectfully invited to the pertinent
provision of Republic Act (RA) No. 11032, otherwise known as the Ease of
Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018.
Section 11 (f) thereof provides, viz:

“Sec. 11. Streamlined Procedures for the Issuance of Local
Business Licenses, Clearances, Permits, Certifications or
Authorizations. -— The LGUs are mandated to implement the
following revised guidelines in the issuance of business licenses,
clearances, permits, certifications or authorizations:

Xxx

(f) Barangay clearances and permits related to doing business
shall be applied, issued, and collected at the city/municipality in
accordance with the prescribed processing time of this Act:
Provided, That the share in the collections shall be remitted to the
respective barangays.

The pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise
known as "The Local Government Code of 1991", specifically
Article IV, Section 152(c) is hereby amended accordingly."

Accordingly, Section 11 (f) of RA 11032, as above-cited, duly amended
pertinent provision of the Local Government Code and provides that
Barangay clearances and permits related to doing business shall be applied,
issued and collected at the City/Municipality, with caveat that the share in
the collections shall be remitted to respective Barangays.

Corollarily, this Department has issued Memorandum Circular (MC)
No. 2019-177 series of 2019, entitled “Guidelines in the Integration of the
Issuance of Barangay Clearance in the Permitting Processes of Cities and
Municipalities’. At its core, said MC was issued to provide guidelines and
standard processes in compliance to Section 11 (f) of RA 11032. Items
6.3.2.1 and 6.3.2.2 thereof respectively provide that the Sangguniang
Barangay shall enact an ordinance relative to Barangay Clearance fees on
business permit and location clearance for building permit; and shall pass a
resolution authorizing the City/Municipal Treasurer to collect fees for
Barangay Clearance for Business permit and location clearance purposes.

Likewise, Item 6.3.1.7 thereof provides that the City/Municipality shall
remit the collected Barangay Clearance fees to concerned Barangay not
later than seven (7) working days of the ensuing month with the list of the
issued Business Permit and Building Permit.

We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you.
Very truly yours,

ORITY OF THE SECRETARY:

MP
3 Wiccan, CESO III

me ger-in-Charge
Office of the Undersecretary for Local Government

LLLS/27

Copy furnished:

DIR. JULIE J. DAQUIOAG

Regional Director, DILG-Region II!
Brgy. Maimpis, City of San Fernando
Pampanga

