Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http:/Avww.dilg.com.ph

4 February 2021

TEODULFO E. SENA, JR.

Tax Mapper 1

Office of the Municipal Assessor
Municipality of Pandan, Catanduanes

Dear Mr. Sefia, Jr.:

This has reference to your letter dated 27 October 2020 seeking this
Department’s opinion and/or interpretation of Section 472 of Republic Act
No. 7160, otherwise known as “Local Government Code of 1991”.

The crux of the issue deals with your qualifications as Municipal
Assessor. You represented that you have all the qualifications as provided
for in Section 472 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as “Local
Government Code of 1991” (LGC), except that of being a resident of the
local government unit concerned.

Specifically, you ask the following queries:

4. Can the Municipal Mayor appoint you on a temporary capacity until
an eligible applicant applies for the position?

2. Can the Municipal Mayor appoint you on a temporary capacity until
you were able to establish the residency requirement?

At this juncture, may we invite your attention to Section 9(b), Rule
IV of Civil Service Commission (CSC) 2017 Omnibus Rules on
Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions (ORAOHRA), which
defines “temporary appointment” as one that is issued to a person who
meets the education, experience and training requirements for the
position to which he/she is being appointed to, except for the appropriate
eligibility. A temporary appointment may only be issued in the
absence of an applicant who meets all the qualification requirements
of the position as certified by the appointing officer/authority. .0« A
temporary appointment issued to a person who does not meet any of the
education, training or experience requirements for the position shall be
disapproved/invalidated except to positions that are hard to fill, or other
meritorious cases as may

be determined by the Commission, or as provided by special law xxx.
(Emphasis theirs)

As can be gleaned from the afore-cited provision, appointment for
the position of Municipal Assessor, which is mandated to be filled in
provinces, cities and municipalities’, need to comply with the minimum
qualifications for the position as provided in the “Qualification Standards;
Assessor and Appraiser Positions®” issued by the CSC3, and Section 472
of the LGC?.

Accordingly, it is our view that as long as the merit and fitness
qualifications for the position are met, a temporary appointment can be
issued by the Municipal Mayor as the appointing authority, and concurred
to by the majority of the sanggunian members concerned. Provided that,
the appointment shall not exceed twelve (12) months reckoned from the
date it was issued and there is a certification issued by the appointing
officer/authority vouching the absence of an applicant who meets all the
qualification requirements for the position. Provided further that, the
appointee may be replaced sooner if a qualified eligible who is willing to
accept the appointment becomes actually available.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary
opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have addressed your concerns accordingly.

Thank you

Very truly yours,
Authority of the Secretary:

i of iy
KRU L\ IRINGAN
—— Officer-in}Charge
Office of the Undersecretary for Local Government

1 Section 472 of Republic Act No. 7160

2 a) Bachelor's degree preferably in Civil or Mechanical Engineering, Commerce, or any related course
b) 3 years experience in real property assessment work or in any related field

c) No training required

d) RA 1080 (Real Estate Service)

3 Dated 20 September 2012

4 Section 472. Qualifications, Powers and Duties. — a :
(a) No person shall be appointed assessor unless he is a citizen of the Philippines, a resident of the local

government unit concerned, of good moral character, a holder of a college degree preferably in civil or mechanical
engineering, commerce, oF any other related course from a recognized college or university, and a first grade civil
service eligible or its equivalent. He must have acquired experience In real property assessment work or in any
related field for at least five (5) years in the case of the city or provincial assessor, and three (3) years in the case

of the municipal assessor.

Legal/91
Copy furnished:
ATTY. ANTHONY C. NUYDA, CESO Iil

Regional Director, DILG Region V
Rizal Street, Albay District, Legaspi City

