
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG	OPINION	No.	86	s.2021
21 July 2021
HON. LEONARDA T. SARITA
Punong Barangay Barangay Puhagan Municipality of Valencia Province of Negros Oriental

Dear Punong Barangay Sarita:

This has reference to your undated letter seeking approval from the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government so that Barangay Puhagan be allowed to utilize a portion of the 80% share from the proceeds of the utilization of national wealth in the amount of One Hundred Million Pesos (P100,000,000.00) to fund the priority development projects of the barangay, such as, quarantine/evacuation center due to the COVID-19 pandemic, opening and improvement of the road networks within the barangay, construction of slope protections and flood control systems and barangay water system.

Per your letter, Barangay Puhugan is one of the host barangays of the Southern Negros Geothermal Power Plants of Energy Development Corporation situated in the Province of Negros Oriental. As such, the barangay is e beneficiary of the Royalty taxes derived from the utilization of national wealth.

The barangay has accrued savings in the amount of P200,000,000.00 deposited in government depository banks as "time deposit" and earn interest per annum.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the barangay is in dire need of quarantine facility/evacuation centers. It started the site development and construction of one of the quarantine/evacuation centers but lacks funds to complete the construction.

The barangay identified other priority developmental projects but does not have sufficient funds to realize the same. Hence, the request for the SILG's approval.

Foremost, we would like to inform you that the Department has already answered a similar query, as the herein request. In the Department's Legal Opinion No. 17, S. 2011, the Department has opined that:

"the DILG-DOE Joint Circular No. 98-01 dated September 2008 provides that the utilization of the 80% of the national wealth proceeds shall be applied solely to LOWER THE COST OF ELECTRICITY in the local government unit where such a source of energy is located. This is a mere reiteration of Section 294 of RA 7160 or the Local Government Code of 1991.

The aforesaid joint circular further provides that 'any use of the national wealth proceeds outside the prescription in the DILG-DOE Circular No. 95-01 and 98-01 shall require the approval of the DILG Secretary'.

Section 294 of RA 7160 is explicit on the utilization of the proceeds from the share of national wealth of the local government units - that is, to finance local development and livelihood projects, provided however, that at least 80% of the proceeds derived from the development and utilization of hydrothermal, geothermal, and other sources of energy shall be applied solely to LOWER THE COST OF ELECTRICITY in the local government unit where such a source of energy is located."

Southern Negros Geothermal Power Plants of Energy Development Corporation activities clearly pertains to the utilization and development of a source of energy. Hence, the prohibition in Section 294 of the LGC therefore applies. The law does not give the DILG Secretary any discretionary power to alter the law.

Accordingly, we regret to DENY your request to utilize a portion of the 80% shares from the proceeds of the utilization of national wealth to fund priority development projects of the barangay.

Be that as it is, this opinion is being rendered without prejudice to the opinion/view of the more authoritative agency.

We hope to have assisted you on the matter. Thank you. Very truly yours,

ETARY:


Undersecretary for Barangay Affairs
LSl'!IO

Copy furnished=
DIR. LEOCAOIO T. TROVELA
Regional Director, DILG-Region VII Sudlon, Lahug, Cebu City
