
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA comer Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilq.com.ph
DILG	OPINION	No.	57	s.	2021
APR 23 2021
DIR. LEOCADIO T. TROVELA, CESO IV
Regional Director, DILG-Region VII Sudlon, Lahug
Cebu City

Dear RD Trovela:

This has reference to your letter dated 27 January 2020 requesting the Central Office to issue a definitive legal opinion regarding salary adjustment of an Acting Mayor.

Please be informed that to this date, the Central Office finds no cogent reason to depart from the assailed legal opinion, DILG Legal Opinion No. 17, Series of 2019, stating that vice mayor cannot validly claim the salary pertaining to the office of the mayor because the exercise of the powers and performance of the duties and functions of the mayor is merely brought about by the temporary absence of the latter (Sec. 46(a), Local Government Code). It is just an additional function or duty of the vice mayor and as such, he is not entitled to any further remuneration (Sec. 445(a), LGC).

Moreover, the Supreme Court in the case of Dimaandal vs. Commission1 on Audit has ratiocinated that that designation is simply the mere imposition of new or additional duties on the officer or employee to be performed by him in special manner. It does not entail payment of additional benefits or grant
upon the person so designated the right to claim the salary attached to the position1. As such, there being no appointment issued, designation does not entitle the officer designated to receive salary of the position.

Hence, DILG Legal Opinion No. 17, Series of 2019 stands as the recent opinion on the matter.

1 G.R. No. 112197, 26 June 1998
1 COA Decision No. 95-087 dated 2 February 1995











This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you. Very truly yours,



INGAN,CESO Ill
retary for Local Government

Ls/90
