
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA comer Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 52 s.2021
23 April 2021


DIR. LEOCADIO T. TROVELA, CESO IV
Regional Director, Region VII Sudlon, Lahug, Cebu City

Dear Regional Director Trovela:

This in reference to your letter dated 16 March 2021 seeking this level's guidance pursuant to DILG Circular No. 01, Series of 2010, there being no clear precedence regarding the representation of Mayor Lenin Alviola in the Executive Committee in the Provincial Development Council.

Based on the documents forwarded to this Office, on 05 and 19 November 2019, respectively, Governor Roel R. Degamo sought this Department's assistance, through Provincial Director Dennis Quinones, to facilitate the conduct of election/selection among the mayors and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), to be the representative of the Provincial Development Council (PDC) Executive Committee (ExeCom).

The aforesaid request has been reiterated in a letter dated 26 May 2020, wherein Governor Degamo informed PD Quinones that the NGOs were able to select their representatives, while the mayors did not.

By reason thereof, Mayor Lenin P. Alviola of Municipality of Bacong, and President of the League of the Municipalities (LMP)-Negros Oriental Chapter, informed the PDC Chair that following the rule of tradition, he shall represent all the city and municipal mayors in the PDC ExeCom, attaching thereto a manifesto of 4 out of 6 city mayors endorsing him as representative.

Governor Degamo informed Mayor Alviola that the fact that he is the LMP President does not automatically make him the representative of PDC ExeCom. Thus, on 25 November 2019, Governor Degamo sent a letter to Mayor Alviola, furnished all the mayors, inquiring whether a convention/selection was conducted. If there are none, Governor Degamo recommended that the same be conducted on 03 December 2019 at the
Negros Convention Hotel.







However, on the scheduled date of election, there was no quorum, thus, no resolution submitted. Per representation of Governor Degamo, there is still no representative from the mayors in the PDC ExeCom.

In reply to Governor Degamo's request for the Department to conduct the election, your good Office, in a letter dated 05 August 2020, addressed to Provincial Director JohnJoan Mende, posited that "the DILG, through its officers, is not bestowed with any function of similar nature in the development council structure." Citing Section 113 of the LGC, RD Trovela further asserted that at most, it is the Secretariat which is the more convenient body to be tapped on matters such as facilitating election of ExeCom representatives.

You further articulated the foregoing, in a letter dated 16 March 2021 addressed before this Office that "neither the LGC nor its Implementing Rules and Regulations prescribe that such election must be done by election. What has been constantly emphasized is that the representatives must be "chosen from among themselves" xxx- Even Section 4 of Executive Order No. 471, S. 1991, reiterated the same bare requirement."

Hence, pursuant to DILG Circular No. 01, Series of 2010, there being no clear precedence on the matter, you are now seeking guidance from this level.

Upon perusal of the documents submitted, it is the understanding of this level that the issue to be resolved herein concerns the propriety of Mayor Lenin Alviola's representation in the PDC ExeCom even without the election from among the member-mayors of the PDC for the purpose of determining their representative in the ExeCom. And, in relation thereto, if "election" can be construed as "chosen from among themselves" as provided in the LGC.

Unarguably, the Local Development Council, in this case, the Provincial Development Council (PDC), is composed of, among others, all mayors of component cities and municipalities pursuant to Section 107 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991" (LGC). Amongst themselves, they shall choose their representative to be the member of the Executive Committee of the PDC. The pertinent provision of the LGC and Article 182(f)(1)(i) of its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) provides:

SECTION 111. Executive Committee.	-	(a) Each local development council shall create an executive committee to

represent it a.nd act in its behalf when it is not in session. The composition of the executive committee shall be as follows:

(1) The executive committee of the .provincial development council shall be composed of the governor as chairman, the representative of component city and municipal mayors to be chosen from among themselves, the chairman of the committee on appropriations of the sangguniang panlalawigan, the president of the provincial league of barangays, and a representative of non-governmental organizations that are represented in the council, as members.

Clearly, and to reiterate for emphasis, all the component city and municipal mayors, shall choose from among themselves, in a meeting called for such purpose, on who shall be their representative to the PDC. The law is clear and unambiguous.

A cardinal rule in statutory construction is that when the law is clear and free from any doubt or ambiguity, there is no room for construction or interpretation. There is only room for application. As the statute is clear, plain, and free from ambiguity, it must be given its literal meaning and applied without attempted interpretation1. Where the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, the law is applied according to its express terms, and interpretation should be resorted to only where a literal interpretation would be either impossible or absurd or would lead to an injustice.2

Accordingly, it is our view that the representation of Mayor Alviola to the PDC ExeCom as member thereof, merely by rule of tradition and without undergoing the process of choosing from among themselves (mayor­ members as members of the PDC) the representative to the ExeCom, lacks the requirement of the law. Further, as opined by Region VII, it is likewise our view that "election" can be construed as, and/or be equated to, "choose from among themselves" as a mode of determining who shall be their representative to the ExeCom, using as basis the book of late Senator Aquilino Q. Pimentel, as cited in the opinion of Region VII.

     Finally, it is worthy to note that pursuant to Executive Order No. 471, Series of 1991, DILG Provincial Operations Officer is an ex-officio member of the Executive Committee of the PDC. Hence, DILG cannot participate, nor be involved, in the election of mayors' representative to the council.




1 Bolos vs. Bolos, G.R. No. 186400, October 20, 201O
2 Barcellano vs. Barias, G.R. No. 165287, September 14, 2011

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.
We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you. Very truly yours,
-the Authority of the Secretary:
-NHiRrnWl NUGUA N,ceso 111
etary for Local Government



Lega/191

Copy Furnished:

Governor Roel R. Degamo Office of the Provincial Governor Province of Negros Oriental Dumaguete 6200








