Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, Quezon City
www.dilg.gov.ph

DILG OPINION No. 09 s.2021
4 February 2021

MR. RICHARD STEPHEN S BANDONG
Municipal Local Government Operations Officer
DILG Office Binangonan

National Road Calumpang, Binangonan
Province of Rizal

Dear MLGOO Bandong:

This has reference to your letter dated 02 October 2020 requesting for
legal opinion concerning the extent of authority of the Officer-In-Charge,
Office of the Punong Barangay, in terms of the power to appoint, suspend,
or dismiss employees. The query is stated as follows:

“The Punong Barangay is preventively suspended for a period of 90 days
rendering him temporarily incapacitated to perform his duties for legal
reasons. We would like to seek a legal opinion on whether the OIC Punong
Barangay can:

a.) Exercise the following: appoint, suspend or dismiss employees after
thirty (30) working days while that(sic) the Punong Barangay is serving
the 90-day preventive suspension which is not considered as a
punishment or penalty for misconduct in office but as a preventive

measure.

b.) lf yes, can the OIC Punong Barangay exercise such power to appoint,
suspend, or dismiss an employee even if the thirty (30) day period has
not expired?

Relevant to the issues posed is Section 46 of Republic Act No. 7160
or the Local Government Code of 1991 (LGC), thus:

SECTION 46. Temporary Vacancy in the Office of the Local Chief
Executive. - (a) When the governor, city or municipal Mayor, or Punong
Barangay is temporarily incapacitated to perform his duties for physical or
legal reasons such as, but not limited to, leave of absence, travel abroad,

and suspension from office, the vice-governor, city or municipal vice-mayor,
or the highest ranking Sangguniang Barangay member shall automatically
exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions of the local chief
executive concerned, except the power to appoint, suspend, or dismiss
employees which can only be exercised if the period of temporary incapacity
exceeds thirty (30) working days.

XXXX

(c) When the incumbent local chief executive is traveling within the
country but outside his territorial jurisdiction for a period not exceeding three
(3) consecutive days, he may designate in writing the officer-in-charge of the
said office. Such authorization shall specify the powers and functions that
the local official concerned shall exercise in the absence of the local chief
executive except the power to appoint, suspend, or dismiss employees.

(d) In the event, however, that the local chief executive concerned
fails or refuses to issue such authorization, the vice-governor, the city or
municipal vice-mayor, or the highest ranking Sangguniang Barangay
member, as the case may be, shall have the right to assume the powers,
duties, and functions of the said office on the fourth (4th) day of absence of
the said local chief executive, subject to the limitations provided in
subsection (c) hereof.

(e) Except as provided above, the local chief executive shall in no
case authorize any local official to assume the powers, duties, and functions
of the office, other than the vice-governor, the city or municipal vice- Mayor,
or the highest ranking Sangguniang Barangay member, as the case may be.

Based on Section 46 (e), in relation to (c) of the LGC, an Officer-in-
Charge (OIC) to the office of the local chief executive (LCE) may be
designated only when the latter is traveling within the country but outside
his territorial jurisdiction for a period not exceeding three (3) consecutive
days. The LCE designating the OIC shall specify in his written authorization
the powers and functions that the local official concerned shall exercise in
his absence, except the power to appoint, suspend, or dismiss employees.

Since it appears that herein Punong Barangay is not traveling within
the country but outside his territorial jurisdiction for a period not exceeding
3 consecutive days, the aforequoted Section 46 (c) of the LGC is not
applicable so that an OIC to the Office of the Punong Barangay cannot be

designated.

Hence, on the first day that the Punong Barangay was incapacitated to
perform the duties of his office since he must have already started serving

his 90-day preventive suspension, the 1* ranking sangguniang barangay
member should have automatically exercised the powers and perform the
duties and functions of Punong Barangay. The 1*-ranking sangguniang
barangay member is then referred to as Acting Punong Barangay.

Considering that the Punong Barangay’s temporary incapacity has
already been predetermined to have exceeded the thirty (30) working days
provided by law, the power to appoint, suspend and dismiss employees, is
deemed to have accrued to the Acting Punong Barangay from the first day
of his assumption as such. The last portion of Section 46(a) of the LGC is
categorical on this.

We hope to have sufficiently addressed your concerns. Thank you.

Very truly yours,
ORITY OF THE SECRETARY:

Ls/84/17
Copy furnished:

DIRECTOR ARIEL O. IGLESIA
Regional Director, DILG-CALABARZON
3/F Andenson Bidg. 1, National Highway
Brgy. Parian, Calamba City, Laguna

