Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http://www.dilg.com.ph

4 February 2021

HON. ARLYNN H. ARCILLA
Vice-Mayor
Municipality of Virac, Catanduanes

Dear Vice-Mayor Arcilla:

This has reference to your letter dated 15 December 2020 concerning
Resolution No. 2020-12-413, series of 2020, entitled “A Resolution
Recommending to the Department of the Interior and Local Government for
the Declaration of a Permanent Vacancy in the Sangguniang Bayan of Virac
due to Continued Unauthorized Absences of Honorable Councilor Ephraim
Antonio A. Gianan” adopted by the Sangguniang Bayan of Virac,
Catanduanes.

Based on the subject Resolution, Sangguniang Bayan (SB) Member
Gianan has been absent since 17 March 2020 to date and has already
exceeded the maximum allowable leave of absence and therefor incurred
prolonged unauthorized absences.

The Sangguniang Bayan of Virac, Catanduanes has requested the
herein concerned SB member to report to work in its letters dated 20 July
2020 and 17 September 2020, and through a Municipal Resolution No. 2020-
10-307 dated 1 October 2020, entitled “A Resolution Requesting Hon.
Ephraim Antonio A. Gianan to Report to Work and Fulfil [his] Sworn Duty as
Sangguniang Bayan Member of the Municipality of Virac, Catanduanes”

However, despite repeated request to report, SB member Gianan still
did not appear and report to fulfil his sworn duties.

It would not be amiss to note that the Sanggunian is of the view that
the justifications of SB member such as his medical condition that requires
him to stay in Manila for medical check-up is not sufficient to cover for his

absences.

Hence your letter-request.

In reply thereto, please be apprised that this Department is bereft of
authority to declare a permanent or temporary vacancy in the local
sanggunian. In DILG Opinion No. 22, series of 2010, dated 10 March 2010,
we opined, thus:

“[T]he Local Government Code did not empower any agency or
official of the government to declare permanent or temporary
vacancy due to the illness of the incumbent.

Xxx due to lack of provision in the Local Government Code, the
determination as to whether or not there is permanent or
temporary vacancy due to illness of the incumbent would be
necessarily become an adjudicatory matter, meaning, such

declaration should be obtained from our courts of justice in order
for the said court to adjudicate and apply the law involved.”

Accordingly, it is only the court which can judicially declare a vacancy
in the office of the Sangguniang Bayan of Virac, Catanduanes. Hence, it is
herein suggested that the matter be brought in the proper forum.

A copy of DILG Opinion No. 22, series of 2021 is hereto attached for
your ease of reference.

We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you.

Very truly yours,
ORITY OF THE SECRETARY:

Ne
HOARY NGAN, CESO Ill
e -in-Charg

LLLS/27

Copy furnished:
DIR. ANTHONY C. NUYDA, CESO Ill

Regional Director, DILG-Region Vv
Rizal St., Legazpi City

