
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA comer Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 53 s.2021
19 April 2021

SANGGUNIANG BAYAN MEMBERS
Ozamiz City
Province of Misamis Occidental Dear SB Members:
This has reference to a copy of your Resolution No. 020-2021 declaring Congressman Rodante D. Marcoleta, SAGIP Party List Representative as persona non grata in your jurisdiction.

As can be culled from the subject Resolution, the same was issued due to the continued insinuations of Congressman Rodante D. Marcoleta against the Lam-an Project of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Ozamiz. Further, Congressman Marcoleta has allegedly "made scurrilous and reckless remarks in an interview publicly shown on YouTube" against the herein concerned Sangguniang Panlungsod.

Ostensibly, the malicious acts of Congressman Marcoleta constitute an unwarranted interference in the local and domestic affairs of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Ozamiz, and that his malicious acts cause misinformation, which triggers a perception that the Lam-an Project is a ghost and tends to besmirch the integrity and reputation of the LGU of Ozamiz City.

Hence, the issuance of the subject Resolution declaring Congressman Marcoleta as persona non grata in your jurisdiction.

At the outset, this Department holds the view that the declaration of persona non grata is generally applied to aliens in the context of diplomatic relations. The term "persona non grata" is a Latin phrase which means "an unwelcome person". Such practice of declaring a person as persona non grata is enshrined in the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. A


diplomat who is no longer welcome to the government to which he is accredited is barred from remaining in the country and declared as persona non grata.1

While it is incontrovertible that there is no law that empowers the local government units to disallow the entry of certain individuals or group of individuals in their respective jurisdiction, there is also no law that prohibits the local government units to express their sentiments, thru the passage of a local resolution, on certain matters, including their sentiments on the entry, much less the presence of certain individual or group of individuals whom they deemed to be a threat to the economic, social, and political stability of their locality.

It is worthwhile to note that it has been settled what a resolution is, as opposed to an ordinance. In the case of Municipality of Paranaque vs. V.M. Realty Corporation (G.R. No. 127820 dated 20 July 1998), the Supreme Court explains, thus:

"A municipal ordinance is different from a resolution. An ordinance is a law, but a resolution is merely a declaration of the sentiment or opinion of a lawmaking body on a specific matter. An ordinance possesses a general and permanent character, but a resolution is temporary in nature. Additionally, the two are enacted differently- a third reading is necessary for an ordinance, but not for a resolution, unless decided otherwise by a majority of all the Sanggunian members." (Emphasis supplied)

Thus, being a mere sentiment or opinion of a lawmaking body, the Department is of the view that local government units are not precluded from passing a resolution, anchored on the welfare and security of their constituents, declaring persona non grata to person/s whom they deemed not only undesirable in their jurisdiction but moreso, if the entry or presence of such individual/s may potentially jeopardize the safety and security of their locality.

Notwithstanding, in DILG Opinion No. 30 series of 2020, dated 7 February 2020, we opined, thus:
"While it is true however that a local sanggunian like you may pass a resolution declaring your sentiment and that would include declaring a certain person s persona non grata, the same must be done within the bounds of law. That 1s,

1 DILG LO No. 30 series of 2020 dated 7 February 2020.


if such declaration is your way of expressing your sentiment, this is perfectly within your authority. However, if such declaration would already engender preventing Mayor Loquinte from assuming his office and/or discharging his functions, this is already reprehensible."

While it is true that the herein subject Resolution declaring Congressman Marcoleta as persona non grata in Ozamiz City is perfectly within your authority, however, such declaration would not prevent him from discharging functions appurtenant to his being a congressman or SAGIP Party List Representative.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you.



RITY OF THE SECRETARY:


NGAN, CESO Ill
Undersecretary for Local Government

LLLS/27

Copy furnished:

DIRECTOR ARNEL M. AGABE
Regional Director, DILG Region-X Masterson Ave., Cagayan de Oro Misamis Oriental



