che)

Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http://www.dilg.com.ph

2 February 2021

HON. EDGAR S. SAN LUIS
Mayor
Santa Cruz, Laguna

Dear Mayor San Luis:

This has reference to your letter dated 10 November 2020
requesting the Department's clarification on this issue: How many
number of votes do the Sangguniang Bayan of Santa Cruz need to
muster in order to pass a resolution that will authorize the LCE to
enter into the Omnibus Term Loan with Landbank?

Per your letter, you represented that the municipal government of
Santa Cruz, Laguna, due to the effects of pandemic, was being offered by
the Landbank of the Philippines (LBP) of an Omnibus Term Loan for
purpose of funding projects, both priority and COVID-19 related.

It appears that you are already aware of the vote required for such
contracts, that is, qualified majority vote.

Hence, your query.

The issues herein call to mind three salient provisions of the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160):

Section 22 (c) of the aforementioned Code provides that:

“Unless otherwise provided in this Code, no contract may be
entered into by the local chief executive in behalf of the local
government unit without prior authorization by the sanggunian
concerned. A legible copy of such contract shall be posted at a
conspicuous place in the provincial capitol or the city, municipal or
barangay hall” (underscoring ours).

Section 444 (b) (1) (vi) of the same Code evenly provides that the
Municipal Mayor shall:

“(vi) Upon authorization by the sangguniang bayan,
represent the municipality in all its business transactions and sign

on its behalf all bonds, contracts, and obligations, and such other
documents made pursuant to law or ordinance” (underscoring
supplied).

On the other hand, Section 447 (a) (2) (iii) of the Code states the
specific powers and functions of the Sangguniang Bayan, as follows:

“Subject to the provisions of Book Il of this Code and upon
the majority vote of all the members of the Sangguniang Bayan,

authorize the municipal mayor to negotiate and contract loans
and other forms of indebtedness”.

The foregoing rule leaves no doubt that prior authorization from the
Sangguniang Bayan is necessary in order for the local chief executive to

authorization required from the Sangguniang Bayan, as expressly
provided under Section 447 (a) (2) (iii), is that approved by a majority vote
of all the members of the Sanggunian. The majority vote of all the
members of the Sanggunian is what in law known as Qualified Majority
Vote.

To correctly determine the Qualified Majority Vote, it becomes
imperative to understand the composition of the Sangguniang Bayan.
Section 446, Article III, Title II of the Code provides for the composition of
the Sangguniang Bayan which is as follows:

“Section 446. Composition.- (a) The sangguniang bayan, the
legislative body of the municipality, shall be composed of the
municipal vice mayor as the presiding officer, the regular
sanggunian members, the president of the municipal chapter of the
Liga ng mga Barangay, the president of the Pambayang
Pederasyon ng mga Sangguniang Kabataan, and the sectoral
representatives, as members.”

In your letter, you showed the following composition of the
Sangguniang Bayan of Santa Cruz:

Elected Members - 8

ABC President - 1

SK President - 1

Vice-Mayor - +
1

In the case of Santiago vs. Guingona, et al. (G.R. No. 134577, 18
November 1998), “majority” has been defined as that which is greater
than half of the membership of the body or that number which is 50%+1
of the entire membership. Following said ruling, and following the
Qualified Majority rule, since the total membership of the sanggunian is
11, 11 divided by 2 will give us a quotient of 5.5. and 5.5+1 will give us the
total of 6.5. Let it be noted, however, that a fraction cannot be considered
as one whole vote, since it is physically and legally impossible to divide a
person or even his vote into a fractional part. Accordingly, we have to go
down to the next whole number, which is 6, which is also more than %,
half being 5.5. Therefore, six (6) sanggunian members must vote to
approve the Resolution authorizing the Municipal Mayor to contract a loan
with the Landbank of the Philippines.

We have to clarify, however, that in said session, the same must
have been attended by at least 7 members, including the presiding officer,
since the 6 affirmative votes shall be coming from the floor because the
presiding officer cannot vote thereon as he is allowed to vote only to break
a tie. Stated differently, the presiding officer cannot vote to complete the
vote requirement for a “qualified majority”.

In the case of Javier, et al. vs. Cadiao, et al. (G.R. No. 185369, 03
August 2016), the Supreme Court held that the Vice-Governor, as the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan’s Presiding Officer should be counted for
purposes of ascertaining the existence of a quorum, but not in the
determination of the required number of votes necessary to uphold a
matter before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan.

We hope to have addressed your concern/s accordingly. Thank
you.
Very truly yours,
Ws OF THE SECRETARY:
Nh ecig
ARUG-LHRINGAN, CESO III

Officér-in-Charge .
Office of the Undersecretary for Local Government)

Ls/17
Copy furnished:
DIR. ARIEL O. IGLESIA
Regional Director, DILG-Region IV-A (CALABARZON)

3"4 Floor, Anderson Bldg. |, Brgy. Parian
Calamba City

