
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 66 s.2021
MAY 07 2021
ENGR. DARWIN C. ESTRANERO
City Mayor Tabuk, Kalinga
Cordillera Administrative Region Dear Mayor Estranero:
This in reference to your letter dated 09 February 2021 seeking this Department's opinion regarding the following:

1. Whether it is proper for the City Mayor to appoint all employees of the Office of the Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod; and

2. Whether it is possible to remove position of the Assistant to the Secretary of the Sangguniang Panlungsod as well as other staff positions under the Office of the Secretary, and transfer them to other offices.

Per your letter, the local government unit (LGU) of Tabuk is re­ organizing the existing HR Organizational Structure. By reason thereof, your Office previously presented a query before DILG-CAR regarding the issue of "Whether it is proper for the City Mayor to appoint all employees of the Office of the Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod'' which was answered in the negative, citing DILG Legal Opinion No. 17, Series of 2010 and the Local Government Code of 1991.

In support of your request for legal opinion, you cited Republic Act No. 9404 which is the Charter of the City of Tabuk, specifically Section 25 thereof, which grants the Mayor the authority to appoint the Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod. The pertinent provisions states:

"Sec. 25. The Secretary to the Sangguniang Panglungsod-

(a) 	There shall be a secretary to the sangguniang panlungsod with the rank and salary equal to a head of a department or office, who shall be appointed by the city mavor whith the concurrence of the majority of all the sangguniang panlungsod members, subject to civil service law, rules and regulations. (Emphasis Ours)"

·,


Further, it was noted that the Office of the Secretary, pursuant to the City's HR Organizational Structure, is a Department. However, since the creation of the City of Tabuk, no ordinance was passed authorizing the same to be established as a separate Department with its own staff.

Hence there seems to be a conflict since the authority to appoint the Secretary to the sanggunian is vested upon you, as the local chief executive, while the power to appoint the Assistant to the Secretary of the sanggunian and all other positions under the said office is upon the Vice Mayor.

Thus, quandary arise as to while you are the appointing authority of the Secretary of the sanggunian, you cannot however exercise disciplinary authority over other employees of the Office of the Secretary since the appointing authority thereto is the Vice Mayor.

It was further pointed out that there is no specific provision in RA 9404 as to who shall appoint the Assistant Secretary to the sanggunian and all other positions thereof. Hence, it is your position that it is more appropriate that if it will be the LCE who shall have the authority to appoint the aforementioned positions based on the above-cited bases.

Hence, the foregoing queries.

Pertinent to herein discussion is Section 8(d) of Republic Act No. 9404, otherwise known as the "Charter of the City of Tabuk", in relation to Section 9(b)(1)(v) of the same law, which states:
"Section 8. The Officials of the City of Tabuk
(d} Unless otherwise provided herein, all appointive officials of the City shall be appointed by the city mayor with the concurrence of a majority of all the sangguniang panlugnsod members, subject to civil service law, rules and regulations. The sangguniang panlungsod shall act on the appointment within fifteen (15) days from the date of its submission, otherwise, the same shall be deemed confirmed."
"Section 9. The City Mayor-
b. The City Mayor, as the chief executive of the city government, shall exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions as provided herein:

(1) 	Exercise those powers expressly granted to him by law, those necessarily implied therefrom, as well as powers necessary, appropriate or incidental for the efficient and effective governance of the City and those which are essential to the promotion of the general welfare. Pursuant thereto, he shall:

(v) Appoint all officials and employees whose salaries and wages are wholly or mainly paid out of city funds and whose appointments are not otherwise provided for in this Act as well as those he may be authorized by law to appoint." (Emphasis Supplied)

Further, Section 2511 of the same law provides that the secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod shall be appointed by the city mayor with the concurrence of the majority of all the sangguniang panlungsod members, subject to civil laws, rules and regulations.

However, Section 10(b)(2) of the same law provides that it is within the power of the City Vice Mayor to appoint all officials and employees of the sangguniang panlugsod, except those whose manner of appointment is specifically provided for under existing laws, subject to civil service laws, rules and regulations.

Accordingly, reconciling the aforementioned provisions of the law, it is the City Mayor who has the power to appoint the Secretary of the sanggunian.

However, with respect to the appointment of the officials and employees in the Office of the Secretary to the Sanggunian, it is observed that neither RA 9404 nor was there an ordinance enacted, which provides for the hiring of officials and/or employees of the Office of the Secretary. Hence, we deem it necessary to distinguish the source of funds for the
· salaries/wages of the Office of the Secretary's officials/employees'.

If the source of the salary is from the city's funds, the power to appoint belongs to the Mayor, pursuant to Section 9(b)(1)(v) of RA 9404. On the contrary, if the source thereof is from the office of the sanggunian concerned, the power to appoint belongs to the Vice Mayor.

Ergo, with respect to the appointment of officials and employees in the Office of the Secretary of the sanggunian, qualification should be made with respect to the source of funds of their salaries.

It must be noted that RA 9404, the law governing the Charter of the City of Tabuk, is more specific than the Local Government Code (LGC), which apply to local government units in general, thus, a general law.



,  Section 25. The Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(a) There shall be a secretary to the sangguniang panlungsod with the rank and salary equal to th h ad ofa department or office, who shall be appointed by the city mayor with the concurre ce of the maionty of all the sangguniang panlungsod members, subject to civil service law, rules and regulations.







Henceforth, with due respect to the position of DILG-Kalinga, DILG Legal Opinion No. 17, Series of 2010 pertains to and meant to interpret the provisions of the LGC. By reason of the enactment of RA 9404, and based on statutory construction, that a special law prevails over a general law, the aforesaid interpretation of the Department does not apply in this case.

With respect to the second query, we answer in the affirmative.

Pursuant to Section 76 and 77 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991":
SECTION 76. Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern. - Every local government unit shall design and implement its own organizational structure and staffing pattern taking into consideration its service requirements and financial capability, subject to the minimum standards and guidelines prescribed by the Civil Service Commission.
SECTION 77. Responsibility for Human Resources and Development. - The chief executive of every local government unit shall be responsible for human resources and development in his unit and shall take all personnel actions in accordance with the constitutional provisions on civil service, pertinent laws, and rules and regulations thereon, including such policies, guidelines and standards as the Civil Service Commission may establish xxx (Emphasis Supplied)

Hence, the LCE may organize and/or reorganize the organizational structure and staffing patter of the local government unit.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.
We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you. Very truly yours,
By the Authority of the Secretary:

:\Kl..p/.. .JRINGAN
cretary for Local Government

Legal/91
Copy furnished:

DIR. ARACELI A. SAN JOSE
Officer-in-Charge, DILG-CAR Barangay Center, Upper Session Road Baguio City
