
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA comer Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 58 s.2021
29 April 2021
HON. MANUEL D. MALLILLIN
Sangguniang Barangay Member Barangay Veterans Village Quezon City

Dear Sangguniang Barangay Member Mallillin:

     This has reference to your letter dated 28 January 2021, requesting this Department's opinion relative to the governing rules on successional rights of elected barangay officials.

     As represented in your letter, Punong Barangay Josefina Landingin of Barangay Veterans Village, District 1, Quezon City, went on out of town to attend the forty (40) days of her friend in Nueva Ecija for two (2) days. It is your belief that in case of the absence of the Punong Barangay the highest ranking Sangguniang Barangay member shall assume the position as Officer-in-Charge. However, the highest ranking Sangguniang Barangay member, Gideon Gener is presently terminally ill that requires him to be indisposed to perform his duties for almost eight (8) months.

     Hence, your letter-request for this Department to shed light on the matter.

     In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to Section 46 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (Code) which provides that:

"Section 46. Temporary Vacancy in the Office of the Local Chief Executive. -

(a) XXX
(b) XXX
(c) When the incumbent local chief executive is traveling within the country but outside his territorial jurisdiction for a period not exceeding three (3) consecutive days, he may designate in writing the officer-in-charge of the said office. Such authorization shall specify the powers and functions that the local official concerned shall exercise in the absence of the local chief executive except the power to appoint, suspend, or dismiss employees.

(d) In the event, however, that the local chief executive concerned fails or refuses to issue such authorization, the vice-governor, the city or municipal vice-mayor, or the highest ranking sangguniang barangay member, as the case may be, shall have the right to assume the powers, duties, and functions of the said office on the fourth (4th) day of absence of the said local chief executive, subject to the limitations provided in subsection (c) hereof.

(e) Except as provided above, the local chief executive shall in no case authorize any local official to assume the powers, duties, and functions of the office, other than the vice­ governor, the city or municipal vice-mayor, or the highest ranking sangguniang barangay member, as the case may be."

     Based on the aforecited provisions, when the incumbent Punong Barangay went on a travel within the country but outside his territorial jurisdiction for a period not longer than three (3) consecutive days, the Punong Barangay may designate an officer-in-charge. However, if the Punong Barangay fails or refuses to designate an officer-in-charge in lieu of his absence, the highest ranking Sangguniang barangay member shall assume the powers, duties, and functions of the Punong Barangay on the fourth (4) day of the latter's absence.

     In the herein case, Punong Barangay Josefina Landingin went on out of town for only two (2) days. As such, the highest ranking Sangguniang barangay member need not immediately take over and perform the functions and duties of Punong Barangay Landingin as her absence did not exceed three consecutive days. The Code is categorical when it provides that only in the event of failure or refusal of the Punong Barangay to designate an officer-in-charge, shall the highest ranking Sangguniang Barangay member shall assume the office of the Punong Barangay on his fourth day of absence.

     This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.





TARY:





LLLS/27
cc,

Undersecretary for Barangay Affairs
DIRECTOR MARIA LOURDES AGUSTIN, CESO 111
Regional Director, DILG-NCR
4" Annex Building- SRA, Sugar Center North Avenue, Quezon City
