
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 61 s.2021
26 April 2021

HON. CARMELO G. LAZATIN, JR.
Mayor, Angeles City Office of the City Mayor Angeles, Pampanga

Dear Mayor Lazatin Jr.,

This has reference to your letter dated 08 February 2021 requesting clarification in relation to the plan of the City Government of Angeles to secure a loan from a viable institution to finance procurement of Anti- COVID-19 vaccines for the residents therein.

Per your letter, it appears that Angeles City initiated the plan to procure its own vaccine supply in a bid to provide assistance to the national government. Conversely, in a meeting held on 04 February 2021 with the Development Bank of the Philippines, the City Government of Angeles was informed that the Bureau of Local Government Finance refuses to release a Certificate of Net Borrowing Capacity to the Angeles City LGU since COVID-19 vaccine procurement falls under supplies and not capital outlay.

Under this premise arose the request for a clarification on whether the City Government of Angeles may acquire a PhP 600 Million loan from a viable institution in order to finance its procurement of anti-CoVID-19 vaccines for 411,624 residents.

At the outset, this Department would like to cite pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 7160 otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991" (LGC) relating to the power of LGUs to enter into contracts, including that of the contract of loan, to wit:

SECTION 297. Loans, Credits, and Other Forms of Indebtedness of Local Government Units. - (a) A local government unit may contract loans, credits, and other forms of indebtedness with any government or domestic private bank and other lending institutions to finance the construction, installation, improvement, expansion,

operation, or maintenance of public facilities, infrastructure facilities, housing projects, the acquisition of real property, and the implementation of other capital investment projects, subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the local government unit and the lender. The proceeds from such transactions shall accrue directly to the local government unit concerned.

(b) A local government unit may likewise secure from any government bank and lending institution short-, medium- and long-term loans and advances against security of real estate or other acceptable assets for the establishment, development, or expansion of agricultural, industrial, commercial, house financing and livelihood projects, and other economic enterprises.

(c) Government financial and other lending institutions are hereby authorized to grant loans, credits, and other forms of indebtedness out of their loanable funds to local government units for purposes specified above.

[Emphasis and underscoring supplied].

Accordingly, it is abundantly clear that while the LGUs are allowed to enter into a contract, including one of loan, under the principle of full autonomy in the exercise of its proprietary functions, subject to certain limitations, it must be emphasized that under the afore-quoted provision, it is only allowed for limited purposes.

Note, however that any contract, such as a loan transaction, entered into by the LGU, jointly requires the concurrent exercise of discretion of the sanggunian and the local chief executive and once these are satisfied alongside the requirements established by law and the rules and regulations, the same are presumed valid.

However, as to the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines, it does not fall in any of the specific purposes stated under Section 297 of the LGC. Hence, we are of the view that it shall not be allowed to acquire such loan.

Moreover, it is imperative to stress that the procurement and roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines must at all times be coordinated with the national government, through the National Task Force Against COVID-19 (NTF) and the Department of Health (DOH), in a tripartite agreement involving local governments and pharmaceutical companies. Also, considering that as the main procurer of the said vaccine for the nation, the national government will take the lead to ensure that the necessary monitoring and proper allocation, through the DOH, is done across the country.

Albeit the foregoing, this Department recognizes that the issue herein is best addressed to the Department of Budget and Management - Bureau of Local Government Finance considering that Item 14.4 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA No. 11494 states that the Department of Finance shall provide fiscal policy involving national or local government financing.

Hence, this level's position on the matter should be without prejudice to the former's position, as it is the agency having the administrative competence and expertise on the matter.

We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you. Very truly yours,
By the Authority of the Secretary:


MARLO L. IRINGAN, CESO III
Undersecretary for Local Government


LLLS/32

COPY FURNISHED:

DIR. JULIE J. DAQUIOAG
Regional Director, DILG-Region III Diosdado Macapagal Government Center Maimpis, City of San Fernando, Pampanga





