Republic of the Pniiippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corer Quezon Avenue, Quezon City
www.dilg.gov.ph

DILG OPINION No. 29 s.2021
18 February 2021

ATTY. BONIFACIO V. CURSO
Provincial Legal Officer
Province of Biliran

Dear Atty. Curso:

This has reference to your letter dated 10 August 2020 requesting
for the Department's opinion on Municipal Ordinance No. 8 series of 2017
entitled “AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE WATER DISTRICT OF THE
MUNICIPALITY OF CULABA’ that was not forwarded to the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan for review.

Specifically, the query is on the validity of the Ordinance and
whether or not the same can be given full force and effect.

At the outset, we opine in favor of its effectivity.

The Department has long been consistent in its opinion that
“effectivity” and “validity” of an ordinance are two different things.

We merely need to reiterate a recent opinion, DILG Opinion No. 5
s. 2018, which discussed “effectivity” as the time by which an ordinance
is made effective and can already be implemented and given full force and
effect, governed by Section 59(a) of R.A. No. 7160, otherwise known as
the “Local Government Code of 1991”; and “validity” as the substantive
requirement of an ordinance whether it is consistent with the constitution
and laws, governed by Section 56 of the Local Government Code. These
salient provisions are as follows:

“SECTION 59. Effectivity of Ordinances or Resolutions. (a) Unless
otherwise stated in the ordinance or the resolution approving the local
development plan and public investment program, the same shall take
effect after ten (10) days from the date a copy thereof is posted in a
bulletin board at the entrance of the provincial capitol or city, municipal,
or Barangay hall, as the case may be, and in at least two (2) other
conspicuous places in the local government unit concerned.”

“SECTION 56. Review of Component City and Municipal Ordinances or
Resolutions by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. - (a) Within three (3) days

after approval, the secretary to the Sanggunian Panlungsod or
Sangguniang bayan shall forward to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for
review, copies of approved ordinances and the resolutions approving the
local development plans and public investment programs formulated by
the local development councils. (b) Within thirty (30) days after receipt of
copies of such ordinances and resolutions, the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan shall examine the documents or transmit them to the
provincial attorney, or if there be none, to the provincial prosecutor for
prompt examination. The provincial attorney or provincial prosecutor
shall, within a period of ten (10) days from receipt of the documents,
inform the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in writing of his comments or
recommendations, which may be considered by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan in making its decision. (c) If the Sangguniang Panlalawigan
finds that such an ordinance or resolution is beyond the power conferred
upon the Sangguniang Panlungsod or Sangguniang bayan concerned, it
shall declare such ordinance or resolution invalid in whole or in part. The
Sangguniang Panlalawigan shall enter its action in the minutes and shall
advise the corresponding city or municipal authorities of the action it has
taken. (d) If no action has been taken by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan
within thirty (30) days after submission of such an ordinance or 32
resolution, the same shall be presumed consistent with law and therefore
valid.”

in this very same DILG Opinion No. 5 s. 2018, the Department
categorically stated that a Municipal Ordinance shall be given its legal
effect and be implemented even if the same is still pending review by the
Sangguniang Panlaiawigan.

Accordingly, it is the Department's view that a Municipal Ordinance,
inasmuch as it has undergone the procedural process for its enactment
under the Local Government Code, is accorded its legal effect and
enforceability even in the absence of the Higher Sanggunian’s review on
its validity. This view is supported by the following facts:

a.) that the power of review by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan
commences only at the time of its receipt of approved
ordinances and resolutions submitted for review; and

b.) that, as enunciated in the case of Acaac vs. Azcuna’, the
prescriptive period of 30 days to exercise the power of review
is a limitation of such power, such that when more than 30 days
have elapsed from the time the said ordinance was submitted
for review, it should be deemed approved and valid pursuant
to Section 56(d) of the Local Government Code.

1 GR. No. 187378, 30 September 2013.

a

At this juncture, it is deemed prudent to go back to the premise of
herein query. Per your letter, the Department's opinion shall help decide
on what appropriate actions to take in order to correct lapses committed
by the Sangguniang Bayan of the concerned Municipality. Thus, we have
to emphasize that herein opinion in favor of the effectivity of an ordinance
is separate and distinct to the issue of non-compliance of Section 56(a) of
the Local Government Code, which may be treated as a completely
different matter.

Pursuant to Section 56(a) of the Local Government Code, it is the
Secretary to the Sanggunian, and not the Sanggunian itself, that has the
responsibility of forwarding the copies of approved ordinances and
resolutions to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for review.

Finally, anchored on the principle of presumptive validity of
legislative acts, the Department underscored its position in DILG Opinion
No. 11s. 2019 that:

“Ajn ordinance is already effective and presumed valid pending the
review of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. However, the period within
which the Sangguniang Panlalawigan commences review shall be from
the date of submission by the Sangguniang Bayan Secretary. The
Sangguniang Bayan Secretary may be administratively charged for
dereliction of duty for belated submission of the approved ordinance to
the Sangguniang Panlalawigan.”

We hope to have sufficiently addressed your concerns. Thank you
Very truly yours,

BY AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY:

MA INGAN, CESO Il
etary for Local Government

Legal/84
Copy furnished:

DIRECTOR KARL CAESAR R. RIMANDO
Regional Director, DILG-Region vill
Kanhuraw Hill, Tacloban City, Leyte

