Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, Quezon City
www dilg gov ph

DILG OPINION No. 30 s.2021

17 February 2021

DIR. ALEX. C. ROLDAN, CESO V
Regional Director, DILG-Region XI
58 McArthur Highway, Matina
Davao City

Dear RD Roldan:

This has reference to your Memorandum dated 09 November 2020
referring to the Central Office the letter of Atty. Niel John A. Villarico,
Provincial Legal Office of the Province of Davao de Oro, requesting
clarification on the following issues:

“4. Whether or not a municipal ordinance can validly prescribe
community service as an alternative option for administrative fines

for violations thereof,

2. Whether or not it is proper for the Sangguniang Panlalawigan (SP)

to approve a portion and disapprove in part an ordinary municipal
ordinance on review and/or return the same for refinement,

considering the provisions of Section 26 (b) of R.A. 7160; and

3. Considering that most of these ordinances have already become
effective prior to their disapproval, in whole or in part, we would
like to inquire on the effect of such disapproval to cases pending
in court for violations of said ordinances.”

As manifested by Atty. Villarico, some of the municipal ordinances
in the Province of Davao de Oro include community service either as one
of the penalties or an option in lieu of administrative fines. The
Sangguniang Panlalawigan then resolved to disapprove in part and/or
return ordinances that prescribe community service as sanction. Atty.
Villarico is of the view that when community service becomes an option,
it qualifies as a corrective measure and thus falls within the ambit of the
General Welfare Clause because of the opportunity to reform.

Hence, his request for clarification on the above-enumerated issues:

On the first issue, you have manifested in your Memorandum that
the Central Office has already existing legal opinions on the matter, DILG
Opinions No. 92, series of 2004 and 98, series of 2008.

Pertinent portion of DILG Legal Opinion No. 92, series of 2004 is
quoted hereunder, thus:

In reply thereto, please be informed that the imposition of community
service_as penalty for violation of a city ordinance lacks basis in law.
particularly, the Local Government Code of 1991.

Section 458 of RA 7160 states that the Sangguniang Panlungsod shall:

“(iii) Approve ordinances imposing a fine not exceeding Five
Thousand Pesos (P5,000) or an imprisonment for a period not
exceeding one (1) year, or both in the discretion of the court, for
the violation of a city ordinance.”

Thus, the above-cited provision contemplates only either fine not exceeding
P5,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one (1) year, or both.
Community service is not one among those enumerated imposable penalties for
violation of a city ordinance.

Following the cardinal rule of statutory construction that what the law
excludes, it does not include, the sanqqunian cannot, therefore, provide for
any other penalties, such as community service which is not conferred by
law or may be implied therefrom.

It is also a rule in statutory construction that penal statutes should be
construed strictly. It is, therefore, our considered view that the Sangguniang
Panlungsod may only prescribe such penalty within the range of penalties as
provided in the Local Government Code.

While this department believes that_the innovative penalty of
community service is intended to reform the offender _and to make his
punishment productive and relevant to society, it remains our view that the
delegated power to legislate penal ordinance cannot rise above and beyond
what is conferred by the Local Government Code. (Emphasis Supplied)

Since the cited provision of the Local Government Code has not yet
been amended, there is no basis for us to deviate from the aforesaid legal
opinions. We maintain and still hold the same position.

As to the second and third issues, you stated in your
Memorandum that you have already a position thereto “as found in
attached copy of our letter-reply to Atty. Villarico, for your information”.
However, upon perusal of the documents attached to your Memorandum,

we did not see such letter-reply.

Be that as it may, we deem it apt to give our position thereto to
thresh the matter once and for all.

On the second issue, Section 56 (c) of the Local Government Code
is instructive:

(c) If the sangguniang panlalawigan finds that such an ordinance or
resolution is beyond the power conferred upon the sangguniang
panlungsod or sangguniang bayan concerned, it shall declare such
ordinance or resolution invalid in whole or in_ part. The sangguniang
panlalawigan shall enter its action in the minutes and shall advise the
corresponding city or municipal authorities of the action it has taken.

As to the third issue, as a general rule, laws, including ordinances,
shall have only a prospective effect and must not be applied retroactively
in such a way as to apply to pending disputes and cases. This is
expressed in the familiar legal maxim /ex prospicit, non respicit (the law
looks forward and not backward), and is conformable to Article 4 of the
Civil Code.

Thus, the jurisdiction of a court depends on the existing law at the
time an action is filed; a statute continues to be in force with regard to all
the rights that had accrued prior to its amendment/deciaration of
invalidity; a new doctrine laid down by the Supreme Court overturning an

existing doctrine is to be applied prospectively, and not to parties relying
on the old doctrine and acting on the faith thereof; and many others’.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary
opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have sufficiently clarified the issues. Thank you.

Very truly yours,

ORITY OF THE SECRETARY:

pF

fiha

VAR UO A. \RINGAN, CESO lll
Officer-in-Charge

Office of the Undersecretary for Local Government

Ls/84/17

1 PNP vs. Tejano, G.R. No. 173615, 16 October 2009.

