
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, Quezon City www.dilg.gov.ph
DILG OPINION No. 56 s.2021

29 March 2021

ENGR. JOSEPH V. ASCUTIA
Municipal Mayor
Office of the Municipal Mayor Labo, Camarines Norte

Dear Engr. Ascutia:

This has reference to your letter dated 18 February 2021 requesting for an opinion on whether or not the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, in the exercise of its power to review on the ordinances duly enacted by the Sangguniang Bayan, could outrightly disapprove it on the basis of the recommendation of the legal officer.

Hereunder are the relevant factual antecedents as narrated in your letter:

 The Sangguniang Bayan of Labo, Camarines Norte enacted the following ordinances:

1. An ordinance confirming the authority granted to the local chief executive to negotiate, conclude and obtain loan and ratifying the terms and conditions of the said load hereinafter referred to as "Municipal Ordinance No. 456";

2. An ordinance authorizing the proposed borrowing of Labo in the amount of PhP100,000,000.00 to fund the development infrastructure and logistical development program of the municipality, hereinafter referred to as "Municipal Ordinance No. 457";

3. An ordinance authorizing the proposed borrowing of another PhP100,000,000.00 for the construction of government center/new

municipal building, hereinafter referred to as "Municipal Ordinance No. 454".


 Thereafter, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan enacted a resolution approving Municipal Ordinance Nos. 454 and 456. However, Municipal Ordinance No. 457 remained unacted, hence, it lapsed into law and treated as deemed approved;

 On 13 July 2020, the Sangguniang Bayan of Labo enacted an ordinance amending Municipal Ordinance Nos. 457 and 454;

 However, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan	disapproved the same for the following reasons:

1. The municipality has no approved permit to establish a sanitary landfill and has no approved solid waste management plan, and

2. An ordinance was passed by the Sangguniang Panlalawihan for the establishment of a sanitary landfill for the entire province and that the municipality of Labo has pending expropriation case before the RTC Branch 64.

 You are of the view that the grounds relied upon by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in disapproving the Ordinances are not in accordance with RA 7160 or the Local Government Code of 1991 since, according to you, the only purpose of the review power by the higher sanggunian is to determine whether or not the legislations of the power of the lower sanggunian is within the powers conferred upon them by law. To bolster your points, you discussed:

1. The Municipality of Labo has an existing Solid Waste Management Plan (SWMP) which was conditionally approved by the Environment Management Bureau of the DENR. He is in a quandary if permit to establish is really a necessity considering that the establishment of this kind of facility is vested to the municipal government as provided for under Section 17 of the Local Government Code of 1991. Further, the alleged Provincial Ordinance for the establishment of a sanitary landfill for the entire

province was just presented to the public for public hearing last 25 January 2021 which is not yet effective;

2. As to the existence of the appropriation case involving the property to which the new building is to be constructed, the truth of the matter is that RTC Branch 64 has already issued a Writ of Possession in favor of the Municipality of Labo last 28 January 2021.

First, on the issue of whether or not the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in the exercise of its power to review on the ordinances duly enacted by the Sangguniang Bayan could outrightly disapprove it on the basis of the recommendation of the legal officer.

We find Section 56 (b) of the Local Government Code of 1991 instructive, thus:

"SECTION 56. Review of Component City and Municipal Ordinances or Resolutions by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. - (a) Within three (3) days after approval, the secretary to the Sanggunian Panlungsod or Sangguniang bayan shall forward to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for review, copies of approved ordinances and the resolutions approving the local development plans and public investment programs formulated by the local development councils.

(b) Within thirty (30) days after receipt of copies of such ordinances and resolutions, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan shall examine the documents or transmit them to the provincial attorney, or if there be none, to the provincial prosecutor for prompt examination. The provincial attorney or provincial prosecutor shall, within a period of ten (10) days from receipt of the documents, inform the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in writing of his comments or recommendations, which may be considered by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in making its decision." (Emphasis Supplied)


We assume that the "legal officer" that you are referring to was the Provincial Legal Officer/Provincial Attorney.

Based on the foregoing, the comments or recommendations of the Provincial Legal Officer/Provincial Attorney on the municipal ordinances under review may be considered by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in

making its decision. In statutory construction, well-settled is the rule that the use of the word "may" implies that it is not mandatory but discretionary. It connotes liberty, opportunity, permission and possibility. Hence, the decision on whether or not to adopt in toto the comments and recommendation of the Provincial Legal Officer/Provincial Attorney in enacting the ordinance under review lies entirely on the sound discretion of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. If in the end the Sangguniang Panlalawigan chooses to disapprove the ordinances based mainly on the comments and recommendation of the Provincial Legal Officer/Provincial Attorney, then said august body only exercised the authority given to it under the Local Government Code of 1991.

Now, let us go to the crux of herein controversy on whether the Sangguniang Panlalawigan may disapprove, in the exercise of its review power, the Municipal Ordinances enacted by the Sangguniang Bayan of Labo for these reasons:

1. The municipality has no approved permit to establish a sanitary landfill and has no approved solid waste management plan, and

2. An ordinance was passed by the Sangguniang Panlalawihan for the establishment of a sanitary landfill for the entire province and that the municipality of Labo has pending expropriation case before the RTC Branch 64.

In this regard, we find the next paragraph (paragraph c), Section 56 of the Local Government Code of 1991 instructive, thus:

(c) If the Sangguniang Panlalawigan finds that such an ordinance or resolution is beyond the power conferred upon the Sangguniang Panlungsod or Sangguniang bayan concerned, it shall declare such ordinance or resolution invalid in whole or in part. The Sangguniang Panlalawigan shall enter its action in the minutes and shall advise the corresponding city or municipal authorities of the action it has taken.


It is clear from the foregoing that the only ground to declare an ordinance or resolution invalid, in whole or in part, is when the same is beyond the power conferred upon the sangguniang panlungsod or sangguniang bayan concerned.

In DILG Legal Opinion No. 23, series of 2013, we had the opportunity to state that:

"... aside from the fact that the sangguniang panlalawigan is bound to limit its review of the appropriation ordinance to the requirements set forth by the aforementioned provisions of the Code, Section 56(c) thereof is clear in providing for the only ground upon which a city ordinance or resolution may be declared invalid by the sangguniang panlalawigan i.e., the ordinance is beyond the power conferred upon the sanggunian concerned.

In relation thereto, the case of Moday vs. CA (G.R. No. 107916, 20 February 1997) is instructive. In the said case, the Supreme Court, citing Velasco vs. Blas (G.R. No. L-30456, 20 July 1982) ruled that:

'The only ground upon which a provincial board may declare any municipal resolution, ordinance, or order invalid is when such resolution, ordinance or order is 'beyond the power conferred upon the council or president making the same'. Absolutely, no other is recognized by the law. A strictly legal question is before the provincial board in its consideration of a municipal resolution, ordinance or order. The provincial (board's) disapproval of any resolution, ordinance or order must be premised specifically upon the fact that such resolution, ordinance, or order is outside the scope of the legal powers conferred by law. If a provincial board passes these limits, it usurps the legislative functions of the municipal council, or president. Such has been consistent course of executive authority."

Considering the foregoing, we opine that the grounds, mentioned or used by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for disapproving or rendering the ordinances enacted by the Sangguniang Bayan of Labo invalid, are not in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Code of 1991 and of jurisprudence. We are of the view that the Sangguniang Panlalawigan has exceed its authority when it declared null and void the ordinances null and void on grounds other than what the law provides for the invalidity of a legislative act.

Notwithstanding the foregoing discussion, this opinion is hereby rendered without prejudice to the final determination on the same issues by competent courts.

We hope to have assisted you on the matter. Thank you.


Very truly yours,

BY AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY:

MARLO L. IRINGAN, CESO III
Undersecretary for Local Government

LLLS/84/17

Copy furnished:

ATTY. ANTHONY C. NUYDA
Regional Director, DILG-Region V Rizal St., Albay District, Legazpi City








