Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA comer Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http://www.dilg.com.ph

DILG OPINION No. 31 s.2021

22 February 2021

ATTY. ARVIN L. DANTIS
Legal Officer IV
Municipality of Concepcion, Tarlac

Dear Atty. Dantis:

This has reference to your letter dated 29 September 2020 requesting
this Department’s opinion on whether or not the administrative disciplinary
cases filed with the Sangguniang Bayan of Concepcion, Tarlac are deemed
moot and academic after the lapse of the ninety-day period as provided for
under the Local Government Code of 1991.

As represented in your letter, prior to the emergence of Corona Virus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, several administrative complaints
against certain elective barangay officials of the Municipality of Concepcion,
Tarlac were filed in the Sangguniang Bayan, in accordance with Section 61
(a) of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government
Code of 1991.

However, on 8 March 2020, Presidential Proclamation No. 922, series
of 2020 (Declaring a State of Public Health Emergency throughout the
Philippines) was issued due to the pandemic caused by COVID-19. On 16
March 2020, Presidential Proclamation No. 929 series of 2020 was issued
declaring a State of Calamity throughout the Philippines and imposed an
enhanced community quarantine throughout Luzon.

In compliance with the foregoing issuances and due to the restrictions
brought about by the imposition of community quarantine protocols in Luzon,
all hearings of the said administrative disciplinary cases in the Sangguniang
Bayan of Concepcion, Tarlac were suspended.

Under such premise, arose your query on whether or not the aforesaid
administrative disciplinary cases filed in the Sangguniang Bayan of
Concepcion, Tarlac are deemed moot and academic after the lapse of the
ninety-day period as provided for under the Local Government Code, viz:

“Section 66. Form and Notice of Decision. -

(a) The investigation of the case shall be terminated within ninety
(90) days from the start thereof. Within thirty (30) days after the end
of the investigation, the Office of the President or the sanggunian
concerned shall render a decision in writing stating clearly and
distinctly the facts and the reasons for such decision. Copies of said
decision shall immediately be furnished the respondent and all
interested parties.

(b) The penalty of suspension shall not exceed the unexpired term of
the respondent or a period of six (6) months for every administrative
offense, nor shall said penalty be a bar to the candidacy of the
respondent so suspended as long as he meets the qualifications
required for the office.

(c) The penalty of removal from office as a result of an administrative
investigation shall be considered a bar to the candidacy of the
respondent for any elective position.” (Emphasis supplied)

At the outset, in Macario Diaz Carpio vs. Court of Appeals, Spouses
Gelacio G. Oria and Marcelina Pre Oria (G.R. No. 183102 dated 27 February
2013), the Supreme Court defined a moot and academic case as follows:

“A case or issue is considered moot and academic when it ceases to
present a justiciable controversy by virtue of supervening events, so
that an adjudication of the case or a declaration on the issue would be
of no practical value or use. In such instance, there is no actual
substantial relief which a petitioner would be entitled to, and which
would be negated by the dismissal of the petition. Courts generally
decline jurisdiction over such case or dismiss it on the ground of
mootness ~save when, among others, a compelling constitutional
issue raised requires the formulation of controlling principles to guide
the bench, the bar and the public; or when the case is capable of

repetition yet evading judicial review.”

Relative thereto, in Lomondot vs. Balindong (G.R. No. 192463 dated
13 July 2015) the Court elucidated the concept of a supervening event, thus:

“xxx [A] supervening event is an exception to the execution as a matter
of right of a final and immutable judgment rule, only if it directly affects
the matter already litigated and settled, or substantially changes the
rights or relations of the parties therein as to render the execution
unjust, impossible or inequitable. A supervening event consists of facts
that transpire after the judgment became final and executory, or of new
circumstances that develop after the judgment attained finality,
including matters that the parties were not aware of prior to or during
the trial because such matters were not yet in existence at that time.
In that event, the interested party may properly seek the stay of
execution or the quashal of the writ of execution, or he may move the
court to modify or alter the judgment in order to harmonize it with
justice and the supervening event. The party who alleges a
supervening event to stay the execution should necessarily establish
the facts by competent evidence; otherwise, it would become all too
easy to frustrate the conclusive effects of a final and immutable
judgment. Xxx”

In the herein case, this Department is of the view that the restrictions
brought about by the imposition of community quarantine protocols cannot
be deemed as a supervening factor in the investigation of the administrative
disciplinary cases filed before the Sangguniang Bayan of Concepcion,
Tarlac, which may render such cases moot and academic.

Nevertheless, we deem it apt not to delve into the minutiae of a moot
case as the same is not applicable in the case at bar. It should be noted that,
as a ramifications, when the herein concerned Sangguniang Bayan
suspended the hearings of the administrative cases filed before it, the 90-
day reglementary period, within which the investigation period should be
done pursuant to the Local Government Code, should also be put into halt.
As such, the suspension period should not be deemed included in the
computation of the 90-day period.

To be clear, it is equally important to note that the act of herein
concerned Sangguniang Bayan in suspending the hearings of those cases
filed before it does not amount to dismissal. Such cases are neither
terminated nor dismissed. Otherwise, such complaints will be unjustly put
into naught. Let it be emphasized that essentially, a suspended case is an

open case and can be reopened at a later time when the suspension has
been lifted.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary
opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have assisted you accordingly.
Thank you.

Very truly yours,

LLLS/27

