
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http: //www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 59	s.2021

27 April 2021


ATTY. LIZZAMAE GRACE A. LAVINA
Lavina Law Office
3rd Floor GGN Arcade Commercial Complex
P.N. Roa Sr. Ave., Upper Carmen Cagayan de Oro City

Dear Atty. Lavina:

This has reference to your letter dated 22 July 2020 requesting for this Department's legal opinion on the validity of Resolution No. 2020-133 passed by the Sangguniang Bayan Members of the Municipality of Opal, Province of Misamis Oriental, entitled ''A RESOLUTION REQUESTING THE LOCAL CHIEF EXECUTIVE TO INVESTIGATE THE SECRETARY TO THE SANGGUNIANG BAYAN, MR. EDWARD B. YASAY FOR GROSS MISCONDUCT".

Primarily, the gist of your request is to question the actions taken by the members of the Sangguniang Bayan in revoking the authority of the Vice Mayor to discipline the Secretary to the Sanggunian, and transferring such authority to the Mayor.

Foremost, the Local Chief Executive, pursuant to Section 444 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (LGC) has the power to appoint all officials and employees whose salaries and wages are wholly or mainly paid out of municipal funds and whose appointments are not otherwise provided for in this Code, as well as those he may be authorized by law to appoint.

On the other hand, Section 445 of the LGC vests on the Vice-Mayor the power to appoint all officials and employees of the sangguniang bayan, except those whose manner of appointment is specifically provided in the Code, subject to civil service law, rules and regulations. It must be noted therefore, that, a Sangguniang Secretary is appointed by the Vice-Mayor.






To bolster this, in Atienza vs. Villarosa1, it was held that the authority of the Vice-Governor to appoint the officials and employees of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan is anchored on the fact that the salaries of these employees are derived from the appropriation specifically for the said local legislative body. Indeed, the budget source of their salaries is what sets the employees and officials of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan apart from the other employees and officials of the province. Accordingly, the appointing power of the Vice-Governor is limited to those employees of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, as well as those of the Office of the Vice-Governor, whose salaries are paid out of the funds appropriated for the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. As a corollary, if the salary of an employee or official is charged against the provincial funds, even if this employee reports to the Vice-Governor or is assigned to his office, the Governor retains the authority to appoint the said employee pursuant to Section 465(b)(v) of the LGC.

Dwelling now on the issue, in a plethora of opinions rendered by this Department, we have consistently opined that the power to appoint carries with it the power to discipline, suspend and remove. The Sangguniang Secretary is appointed by the Vice-Mayor, hence, the disciplining authority over him/her is the also the Vice-Mayor.

Accordingly, Resolution No. 2020-133, passed by the Sangguniang Bayan of Opal, Mlsamis Oriental, appears to be suffering from legal infirmities.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you. Very truly yours,





Ls/90
Copy furnished:

DIRECTOR ARNEL M. AGABE
Regional Director, DILG-Region X Masterson Ave., Upper Carmen Cagayan de Oro City


1 G.R. NO. 161081, 10 May 2005.
