.. . .	.
·.l..:;••	• ; .\ _
· DILG:
, ..:.. .• ....•	J-

Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA comer Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 63	s.2021
3 May 2021

HON. ARTHUR R. DEFENSOR, JR.
Governor Province of lloilo

Dear Gov. Defensor Jr.,

Of recent, the Central Office was furnished with a copy of the letter dated 19 March 2021 from Dir. Juan Jovian E. lngeniero, OIC, DILG VI - Western Visayas, encouraging your good Office to make the necessary changes in your EO No. 183-M, Series of 2021 which provides the extension of EO No. 183, Series of 2020, as amended, and implementing additional and adjusted community quarantine measures on regulation of inbound travel.

It is indisputable that the coronavirus has greatly caused and is continuing to cause loss of lives and disruption to the economy. Accordingly, it cannot be gainsaid that all efforts, which are within the bounds of the law, must be exerted in order to prevent or at least limit the spread of the coronavirus as well to ensure the prevention of the spread of other diseases while also addressing the socio-economic devastation brought about by this pandemic.

Significantly, this Department deems it proper to highlight the pertinent provisions of IATF Resolution No. 101 series of 2021, dated 26 February 2021 regarding the uniform travel protocols for land, air, and sea.

Under IATF Resolution No. 101, as to the documentary requirements, travel authority from the PNP/Joint Task Force COVID Shield and the medical certificate from the LGU health office are no longer required for travel. For those Authorized Persons Outside of Residence (APORs) from national government agencies and their attached agencies must











provide their identification card, travel order, and travel itinerary, and must pass symptom-screening at ports of entry and exit pursuant to IATF Resolution No. 98-A issued on February 4, 2021.

In addition, on testing and quarantine, COVID-19 testing shall not be mandatory for domestic travelers except if the LGU of destination will require testing as a requirement prior to travel. In that regard, in case the LGU of destination requires a test, it shall only require a Reverse­ Transcription - Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) test and no other test, which means that LGUs cannot require Antigen tests or rapid tests as test requirements prior to travel. Further, no traveler shall be required to undergo facility-based quarantine unless they exhibit symptoms upon arrival at the LGU of destination.

Note however that all LGUs, regardless if they require PCR tests or not, shall conduct clinical and exposure assessment at all points of entry and exit to ensure that only asymptomatic, non-close contact individuals are allowed to travel or move from one LGU to another. In addition, no traveler shall be required to undergo facility-based quarantine unless they exhibit symptoms upon arrival at the LGU of destination.

Moreover, the new protocols are applicable to all LGUs across the country and all LGUs are enjoined to comply with the new regulations issued by the IATF.

Subsequently, on 15 March 2021, due to the surge of COVID-19 positive cases in NCR and the intent of the LCEs of Western Visayas to prepare for the worst scenario, the RIATF, RTF - Region VI Western Visayas issued Joint Resolution No. 005, series of 2021 referring the request regarding mandatory RT-PCR testing on APORs to the IATF. Particularly, to require all domestic travelers and APORs of negative RT­ PCR results, valid within 72 hours upon extraction, to contain COVID- 19 positive cases to surge in Western Visayas.

However the Province of lloilo issued Executive Order No. 183-M, series of 2' 021 which provides the extension of Executive Order No. 183,
series of 2020, implementing additional and adjusted community quarantine measures on regulation of inbound travel which is inconsistent with the current issuances of the IATF.




It is in this regard that this Department would like to emphasize that while the LGUs enjoy local autonomy and are empowered to issue the necessary orders within their jurisdiction pursuant to the to the general welfare clause provided under Republic Act No. 7160 or known as the "Local Government Code of 1991", however, it must, at all times, make sure that such orders are in harmony and compliant with existing policies of the national task force and applicable protocols. Hence, orders and issuances passed by LGUs must adhere to the directives of the national government and if said orders or issuances were passed prior to the adoption of said policies, the LGU concerned should take the initiative in modifying/amending its directive to conform thereto.

In view thereof, considering that there is yet to be a pending action from the IATF regarding the request of the LCEs of Western Visayas, the Provincial Government of lloilo is hereby encouraged to modify/amend the subject Executive Orders to correspond with the policies of the IATF.

We hope to receive a copy of the modified/amended EO the soonest possible time. Thank you.


Very truly yours,


LLLS/32

COPY FURNISHED:

DIRECTOR JUAN JOVIAN E. INGENIERO, CESO IV
Officer-in-Charge,	DILG-Region VI 6 Parola street, Fort San Pedro
lloilo City
