
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR ANO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center EDSA comer Quezon Avenue. West Trlangle, Quezon Cl y http://www.dllg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 64 s.2021
10 May 2021
MS. VERNA T. NAVA-PEREZ
Secretary to the Sanggunian
Office of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan Secretart Lingayen, Province of Pangasinan
\N\Al\"l.pangasinan.gov.ph

Dear Ms. Nava-Perez:

     This has reference to your letter dated 16 October 2020 requesting this Department's legal opinion regarding the issue of whether the selection and designation of Edgardo C. Fontelera as OIC gives him the privilege to be an ex-officio member of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan as representative of the LnB.

     Pursuant to your letter in a general meeting held on 07 October 2020 by the Board of Directors of the Liga ng mga Barangay (LnB)­ Pangasinan Chapter, it has been resolved that Edgardo C. Fontelera, ABC President of Daso! and Vice President, to be the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of LnB-Pangasinan Chapter, thereby making him an ex-officio member of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. The foregoing resolution was by reason of the untimely demise of the LnB-Pangasinan Chapter President Jose DG. Peralta, Jr. on 03 October 2020. Thus the need to fill in the resulting vacancy in the office.

     Pertinent to herein discussion is Section 2, Article XII of the 2016 Liga ng mga Barangay Constitution and By Law which is instructive, viz:

 Section 2. Vacancies and Succession. In case of permanent vacancy in the office of the president due to refusal to assume office, death or removal from office on the grounds provided in Section 4 of this Article, voluntary resignation permanent incapacity to discharge the duties and functions of president, or fails to comply with his undertaking executed in accordance with the provisions of Article VI, Section 1.5 of the Liga Election Code the Executive Vice President in the case of the National Liga or the Vice President in the case of local chapters, shall assume the office for the unexpired term of the president. Succession shall take effect only after confirmation by the National Executive Board in accordance with Article IX. Section

2 of the Liga Election Code. The Vice President who assumes the position of president by succession shall represent the Liga chapter in the sanggunian concerned upon presentation therein of his certificate of confirmation.

The vice president of the provincial chapter shall assume the post of president as provided in the immediately preceding paragraph, provided that he has not been removed or suspended as president of the municipal or component city chapter concerned. xxx"

     The above provision is unambiguous and leave no doubt in interpretation and application.

     Accordingly, applying the foregoing, Mr. Edgardo C. Fontelera, being the vice president of LnB Pangasinan Chapter, shall assume the position of president by succession by reason of the death of LnB­ Pangasinan Chapter President Jose DG. Peralta, Jr., which created a permanent vacancy.

     However, it must be noted that for the succession to take effect, and consequently for Mr. Fontelera to represent the LnB in the sanggunian, the same must first be confirmed by the national executive board. Provided further, that the succession and assumption as the president pertains only to the unexpired term of his predecessor. Provided lastly, that he should not have been removed or suspended as president of the municipal or component city chapter concerned.

     This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

lega/191
Copy tumtshed
DIR. JAMES F. FAORILAN
Reg10nal Director. DILG-Reg10n I
Aguila Road San Femanoo Crty, La UniOn

Provlnclaf Director Paulino G. Lalata, Jr., CESO V
DILG Pangasman Provlnclal omce
