
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 60 s.2021
27 April 2021

HON. JEFFERSON KEITH C. DE GUZMAN
Municipal Vice Mayor
Municipality of Natividad, Pangasinan

HON. KARLOS GUERRERO D. ZARAGOZA
Municipal Councilor
Chairman on Ethics and Accountability 3rd Floor Multi Purpose Bldg., Pob. East Natividad, Pangasinan

Gentlemen:

This has reference to your letter dated 01 February 2021, requesting this Department's legal opinion regarding the following, and we quote:

1. It has been observed by this office that DILG Legal Opinions when cited or quoted seems to pose no position/power/authority or less of an importance to most of the executive offices in the Municipality of Natividad. How important are DILG Legal Opinions when used in a legislative measure? Do DILG Legal Opinions possess power or authority [of any kind] like a law or an ordinance?

2. The Budget Officer and the HRMO noted in their letter that they could not determine the release of the salary of the JO/Contractual Employees considering that we are currently operating under the REENACTED BUDGET pending the approval of Annual Budget 2021. Don't LGUs have the authority to use the re-enacted budget specifically the MOOE, General and Janitorial Services of our Offices, to release the salary of our contractual/job order employees?

3. Can we consider our contractual/job order employees as "essential operating expense"?

4. Have we not violated the Contract of Agreement we signed with the Employee if we do not release their salary on the agreed upon date?

5. Do the Vice Mayor have the full authority over his employees (including their attendance, job description and salary) if the funds are in his office and signed by him respectfully?

6. Do the Vice Mayor need the permission of the Mayor in releasing funds under the Office of the Vice Mayor and Sangguniang Bayan when the Vice Mayor and the Sangguniang Bayan have separate budget in the Annual Appropriation?

7. Can the budget officer or any head officers need the authority of the Mayor in acting/releasing funds under the office of the Vice Mayor and Sangguniang Bayan when they have separate budgets in the annual appropriation and with respect to the Municipal Resolution Nos. 85 and 86-2019?

8. What are considered as "essential operating expense" in the MOOE appropriations?

On 28 January 2021, VM de Guzman wrote a letter to the Budget Officer and HRMO of Natividad, Pangasinan requesting for the immediate release of salary of Job Order/contractual employees of the local government unit (LGU), which was due since 15 January 2021 (acting temporarily under re-enacted budget and pending the review of Annual Budget 2021), which was however denied in a letter dated 01 February 2021.

Further, included in the aforesaid letter is the question regarding the authority of Vice Mayor over the employees of the Sangguniang Bayan. In support thereof, Vice Mayor cited Municipal Resolution No. 85-2019, entitled "Resolution Authorizing the Hon. Vice Mayor Jefferson Keith C. De Guzman, the Municipal Vice Mayor, and Municipal Treasurer, Mr. Augusto L. Rivera as Signatories to the Deposit Account of the Municipality of Natividad Maintained at the LandBank of the Philippines, Tayug, Pangasinan", and Municipal Resolution No. 86-2019, entitled "Resolution Authorizing the Hon. Vice Mayor Jefferson Keith C. De Guzman to Sign For and in Behalf of the Sangguniang Bayan Including Checks and Other Documents Pertaining to Sangguniang Bayan Affairs, Natividad, Pangasinan". Corollary, Vice Mayor requested the Budget Officer and HRMO to release the salary of Job Order/contractual employees of the Sangguniang Bayan, which is funded under the MOOE of the Vice Mayor. However, the same served to be futile as the same was neither heard nor considered by the Head Officers, which was noted by the local chief executive.

Hence, the foregoing queries.

It appears that the 2nd, 3rd and 8th issues are interrelated. Hence, we deem it best to discuss the same jointly.

Foremost, MOOE is defined under the Glossary of Terms, Budget Operations Manual for Local Government Units 2016 Edition BOM), as an allocation to support the operations of local government units (LGUs)






including those for supplies and materials, transportation and travel, utilities and other maintenance activities. On the other hand, essential operating expenses pursuant to second paragraph, Item 1.5 of the BOM, refers to specific objects of expenditure under maintenance and other operating expenses, which are necessary for the operation of a particular LGU to carry out its mandate in providing efficient and effective basic services. The LGU concerned is in the best position to identify expenses which, according to its best judgement, are essential to its operation1•

Relatedly, Section 323 of the LGC finds application, which states:

SECTION 323. Failure to Enact the Annual Appropriations.
- In case the sanggunian concerned fails to pass the ordinance authorizing the annual appropriations at the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, it shall continue to hold sessions, without additional remuneration for its members, until such ordinance is approved, and no other business may be taken up during such sessions. If the sanggunian still fails to enact such ordinance after ninety (90) days from the beginning of the fiscal year, the ordinance authorizing the appropriations of the preceding year shall be deemed reenacted and shall remain in force and effect until the ordinance authorizing the proposed appropriations is passed by the sanggunian concerned. However, only the annual appropriations for salaries and wages of existing positions, statutory and contractual obligations, and essential operating expenses authorized in the annual and supplemental budgets for the preceding year shall be deemed reenacted and disbursement of funds shall be in accordance therewith.

In the implementation of such reenacted ordinance, the local treasurer concerned shall exclude from the estimates of income for the preceding fiscal year those realized from nonrecurring sources, like national aids, proceeds from loans, sale of assets, prior year adjustments, and other analogous sources of income. No ordinance authorizing supplemental appropriations shall be passed in place of the annual appropriations.

In case the revised income estimates be less than the aggregate reenacted appropriations, the local treasurer concerned shall accordingly advise the sanggunian concerned which shall, within ten (10) days from the receipt of such advice, make the necessary adjustments or reductions. The revised appropriations authorized by the sanggunian concerned shall then be the basis for disbursements. (Emphasis and Underscoring Supplied)




1 DILG Legal Opinion No. 17, Series of 2019






Moreover, as provided in CSC-COA-DBM Joint Circular No. 1, s. 2017, as amended, the payment of services of individuals hired through contract of service2 and through job order3, shall be charged against the Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) in the approved agency budget. Clearly, Job Orders cannot be, and are not considered as essential operating expense.
Thus, Job Order employees can be renewed in a re-enacted budget. Renewal thereof may be covered under re-enacted budget provided said contractual obligation was authorized in the annual and supplemental budget for the preceding year. 4(Underscoring Supplied)

Corollarily, with respect to the fourth issue, since the employment of Job Order employees are in the nature of contracts, it is within the competence and jurisdiction of DBM, COA and/or courts of law to decide whether the Contract of Agreement have been violated. Pursuant to Legal Service Memorandum Order No. 2010-02, this Department cannot give its position on matters containing facts that are justiciable in nature and cognizable by other agencies of the government.

With respect to the 5th, 6th and 7th issues, the discussion are related, thus, we shall present the same jointly.

Pertinent to herein discussion is Section 445 of the LGC, which states:
SECTION 445. Powers, Duties and Compensation. - (a) The vice-mayor shall:
(1) Be the presiding officer of the sangguniang bayan and sign all warrants drawn on the municipal treasury for all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the sangguniang bayan;
(2) Subject to civil service law, rules and regulations, appoint all officials and employees of the sangguniang bayan, except those whose manner of appointment is specifically provided in this Code;
Xxx

Moreover, Section 344 of the LGC states:

SECTION 344. Certification on, and Approval of, Vouchers.
- No money shall be disbursed unless the local budget officer certifies to the existence of appropriation that has been legally made for the purpose, the local accountant has obligated said appropriation, and the local treasurer certifies to the availability of funds for the purpose. Vouchers and payrolls shall be certified to and approved by the head of the department or office who


21tem 8.0, CSC-COA-DBM Joint Circular No. 1, s. 2017
3 Item 9.0, CSC-COA-DBM Joint Circular No. 1, s. 2017
4 DILG Legal Opinion No. 17, Series of 2019

has administrative control of the fund concerned, as to validity, propriety. and legality of the claim involved. Except in cases of disbursements involving regularly recurring administrative expenses such as payrolls for regular or permanent employees, expenses for light, water, telephone and telegraph services, remittances to government creditor agencies such as GSIS, SSS, LBP, DBP, National Printing Office, Procurement Service of the DBM and others, approval of the disbursement voucher by the local chief executive himself shall be required whenever local funds are disbursed.

In cases of special or trust funds, disbursements shall be approved by the administrator of the fund.

In case of temporary absence or incapacity of the department head or chief of office, the officer next-in-rank shall automatically perform his function and he shall be fully responsible therefor.

Hence, with respect to the 5th issue, we answer in the affirmative, applying Section 445(2) in relation to Section 447(a)(1)(viii)5 of the LGC.

However, on the 6th and 7th issues, we answer in the negative, applying Section 344 above. In relation thereto, Section 39 of the Manual on the New Government Accounting System for Local Government Units elaborated Section 344 above, which states:

"Sec. 39. Approval of Disbursements-Approval of disbursements by the Local Chief Executive (LCE) himself shall be required whenever local funds are disbursed, except for regularly recurring expenses such as: payrolls for regular or permanent employees, expenses for light, water, telephone and telegraph services, remittances to government creditor agencies such as GSIS, BIR, PHILHEALTH, LBP, DBP, NPO, PS of DBM
and others, where the authority to approve may be delegated. Disbursement vouchers for expenditures appropriated for the operation of the Sanggunian shall be approved by the provincial Vice Governor or the City Vice Mayor or the Municipal Vice Mayor, as the case may be. (Underscoring Supplied)"


5SECTION 447. Powers, Duties, Functions and Compensation. - (a) The sangguniang bayan, as the legislative body of the municipality, shall enact ordinances, approve resolutions and appropriate funds for the general welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code and in the proper exercise of the corporate powers of the municipality as provided for under Section 22 of this Code, and shall:

(1) Approve ordinances and pass resolutions necessary for an efficient and effective municipal government, and in this connection shall:

(viii) Determine the positions and salaries, wages, allow nces and ot e_r emoluments and benefits of officials and employees paid wholly or mainly from municipal fund and provide for expenditures necessary for the proper conduct of programs, proiects,
services, and activities of the municipal government;








Clearly, the role of the budget officer in relation to the release of funds concerns solely on the existence of appropriation that has been legally made for the purpose, to which a certification shall be issued. On the other hand, the head of department, in this case the Vice Mayor, shall certify and approve the vouchers and payrolls involving the funds over which he has administrative control as to the validity, propriety, and legality of the claim involved. Thus, clearance and/or authority from the local chief executive is not necessary, except in cases of disbursements involving regularly recurring administrative expenses. In which case, approval of disbursements by the local chief executive is required.

Lastly, as to the weight of the Department's legal opinions, while our courts are not bound by them, they may have persuasive effect on issues involving Republic Act No. 7160 or the Local Government Code of 1991 because the Department is the implementing agency of the said law. The legal opinion, in proper cases, can also be a source of good faith on the part of the public official who acted based thereon or bad faith on those who acted contrary thereto6• Nonetheless, may we emphasize that this Department's legal opinion do not have the weight of a law or an ordinance.

Albeit the foregoing, this Department's position on the matter should be without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts having the competence and expertise on the matter.

We hope to have assisted you on the matter. Thank you.



Lega//91
Copy furnished:

DIR. JAMES F. FADRILAN, CESO Ill

Regional Director, DILG Region-I Aguila Road, Sevilla Norte
San Fernando City, La Union

6 DILG Legal Opinion No. 19, Series of 2017
