
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City www.dilg.gov.ph
DILG OPINION No. 129 s.2021
DEC 2 0 2021

DIR. ARACELI A. SAN JOSE
OIC, DILG-CAR
Barangay Center, Upper Session Rd. Corner North Drive, Baguio City

Dear Dir. San Jose:

This has reference to your letter dated 13 July 2021 requesting clarification pertaining to the term of office of the Head of Persons with Disability Office pursuant to Republic Act No. 10070 and its implementing rules and regulations.

As represented, you are of the initial view that the head of PDAO or Focal Person shall have a term of three (3) years and shall be reappointed for another term based on the Sanggunian selection process. Such view is anchored on this Department's Memorandum Circular No. 2010-103 entitled "Establishment of Persons with Disability Affairs Office (PDAO) in Every Province, City an Municipality Pursuant to RA 10070" dated 23 September 2010.

However, you are reconsidering your initial view after going through the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA 10070.

Nevertheless, the matter is being referred to the Central Office due to the absence of an existing Department opinion on the subject query.

While it is true that the DILG Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 2010-103, entitled "Establishment of Persons with Disability Affairs Office (PDAO) in Every Province, City and Municipality Pursuant to RA 10070" dated 23 September 201O was specifically issued to provide guidelines on the establishment of the said office including the term of office of the head of PDAO, we are of the view that the subsequent issuance of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. 10070 effectively supersedes any provision of DILG MC No. 2010-103 that are inconsistent thereto. Section 20 of the IRR of RA 10070 reads:

"Section 20. Repealing Clause. All rules and regulations inconsistent with this IRR are hereby modified accordingly."

Further, following the promulgation of the IRR of RA 10070 on August 25, 2016, this Office has issued DILG Memorandum No. 2017-119 on September 13, 2017. The said MC provided the "Guidelines for the Establishment of Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office (PDAO) and the Conduct of Persons with Disabilities General Assembly." The

"Matino, Mahusay at Maaasahan"
Trunkline No.: 8876-34-54

said guidelines no longer discussed the term of Office of the PDAO but rather provided the process on how to nominate the persons to sit in the PDAO. Evidently, the latest DILG MC is in line with the IRR of RA 10070.

Accordingly, we opine that the term of office of the head of PDAO should no longer be limited to a specific period or terms. Section 14 of the IRR of Republic Act No. 10070 categorically provides for the nature of employment of PDAO personnel, that is, as "permanent", thus:

"Section 14. Nature of Employment, Composition and Functions of PDAO Personnel- The Persons with Disability Affairs Office shall have at least four {4) personnel on a permanent status.

The four (4) permanent positions shall perform the following functions:

(a)	Head of PDAO/Officer Xxx" (Emphasis supplied).

The same IRR of RA 10070 defines the term "permanent status" in this manner:

"Permanent Status" refers to employment status of an employee who meets all the minimum qualification requirements of the position to which he/she is being appointed, including the appropriate eligibility prescribed, in accordance with the provisions of law, rules and standards promulgated in pursuance thereof (based on CSC Omnibus Rules on Appointment and other Personnel Actions)."

As distinguished from the term "temporary status," the same IRR provides as follows:

"Temporary Status" refers to the employment status of an employee who meets the education, experience and training requirements for the position to which he/she is being appointed except for the appropriate eligibility but only in the absence of a qualified eligible actually available, as certified to by the Civil Service Regional Director or Field Officer. The appointment shall not exceed twelve months, reckoned from the date it was issued but the appointee may be replaced sooner if a qualified eligible who is willing to accept the appointment becomes available." (Emphasis Supplied)

As could be gleaned from the foregoing, only the personnel with temporary status was given specific period or term.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have guided you accordingly. Thank you.

Very truly yours,
By Authority of the Secretary:



OUSLG/MLR/LLLS-LRALLD/jam/clp


