Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http:/Awww.dilg.com.ph

DILG OPINION No. 51 s.2021

15 April 2021

MS. VILMA C. ALVESTER
Farmers Association President

MR. FEDERICO B. CULATON
Sotto-Bulo Farmers Association
City of Tabuk, Kalinga
Cordillera Administrative Region

Dear Ms. Alvester and Mr. Culaton:

This in reference to your letter dated 27 March 2020 seeking this
Department's opinion regarding the following issues and we quote:

a. Is it allowed that a local chief executive is in his quarry supervising his quarrying
activities in times of calamities like this COVID-19 Pandemic?

b. Cana local chief executive prevent a National Office in doing emergency work?

c. Is a National Office like NIA required to secure passes from Local Government
before it can remove any obstruction that can prevent free flowing of water to
the irrigation canal for use of the farmers?

d. Cana Local Chief Executive leave his post as Commander-in-Chief of the Local
Government in times of Calamity like this COVID-19 Pandemic and supervise
his construction business?

Per your letter, the main source of your livelihood is rice production.
Relatedly, your concern arose because of lack of water supply from the
National Irrigation System which was brought to the attention of the
Kalinga Irrigation Management Office (NIA-KIMO).

In response thereto, NIA-KIMO sent DPJ Engineers & Consultants to the
irrigation Dam and Damsite to conduct rechanneling and desilting to ease
the flow of the water to the irrigation canal for use of the farmers. However,
Mayor Darwin C. Estrafero, who allegedly conducts quarrying activities in
the said area, prevented the heavy operator and drivers and even

questioned their Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) passes on the
premise that only the local government unit of Tabuk can issue the same.

As a result, the farmers were greatly affected by the lack of water
supply.

Hence, the foregoing queries.

It is observed that the questions presented herein are interrelated.
Hence, we shall address the same jointly.

With respect to the first and fourth queries, pertinent in herein
discussion is the “Omnibus Guidelines on the Implementation of
Community Quarantine in the Philippines” (“Omnibus Guidelines”), dated
29 April 2020, which provides for the establishments, businesses, and
other operations that are allowed to operate during Enhanced Community
Quarantine (ECQ) and General Community Quarantine (GCQ).

Pursuant to Section 3(6)(b) thereof, for areas under GCQ, mining
and other manufacturing, export-oriented, and electronic commerce
companies, are allowed to operate, between fifty percent (50%) up to full
operational capacity, without prejudice to work-from-home and other
alternative work arrangements. On the contrary, nothing was mentioned
under Section 2 of the same guidelines, regarding the operation of mining
during ECQ.

Hence, it is clear from the foregoing that mining activities are only
allowed to operate during GCQ. Considering that the alleged mining
activities were done during ECQ in Tabuk, Kalinga, the Omnibus
Guidelines have been violated.

In relation thereto, it is imperative to note that Section 1, Article xl
of the Constitution states:

“SECTION 1. Public office is a public trust. Public officers and
employees must at all times be accountable to the people, serve
them with utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty, and efficiency,
act with patriotism and justice, and lead modest lives.”

Thus, it is the bounden duty of Mayor Estrafiero to perform his
responsibilities as such, especially at times of calamity pursuant to
Section 455(b)(1)(vii) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (LGC) in
relation to Section 16 of the same Code, which mandates every local
government units to ensure and promote the health and safety of the
people. It goes without saying that his presence is of utmost importance
especially in delivering the basic services within his jurisdiction.

Anent the second and third queries, we answer in the negative.

May we invite your attention to Memorandum From the Executive
Secretary, Office of the President, dated 16 March 2020, specifically Item
No. 5 thereof, which states:

“5. Only those private establishments providing basic
necessities and such activities related to food and medicine
production, i.e., public markets, supermarkets, groceries,
convenience stores, hospitals, medical clinics, pharmacies and
drug stores, food preparation and delivery services, water-
refilling stations, manufacturing and processing plants of basic
food products and medicines, banks, money transfer services,
power, energy, water and telecommunications supplies and
facilities, shall be open;

a”

XXX

For purposes of the foregoing, transit to and from the
above establishments anywhere within the area covered by
the Enhanced Community Quarantine shall be allowed.
Security personnel of the establishments within the quarantine
area are likewise allowed to travel therein.

In relation thereto, Section 2(4)(i) of the Omnibus Guidelines, states:

“SECTION [2] GUIDELINES FOR AREAS PLACED UNDER
ENHANCED COMMUNITY QUARANTINE

4. The following are allowed to work or operate with a
skeleton workforce unless a different operational capacity
is provided:

i. Power, energy, water, information technology and
telecommunications supplies and facilities, including
waste disposal services, as well as_ property
management and building utility services.

XXX

For purposes of the foregoing, transit by permitted persons
to and from the above establishments anywhere within the
area covered by ECQ shall be allowed.” (Emphasis Supplied)

In relation thereto, Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of
Emerging Infectious Disease (IATF-MEID) Resolution No. 14, Series of
2020, dated March 20, 2020, specifically Item 1(1)(h)(8) thereof, states:

“|. Further, pursuant to the authority granted to the IATF under
the Memorandum dated 16 March 2020 issued by the Office of
the Executive Secretary (OES), the following amendments or
modifications to the existing guidelines on the Enhanced
Community Quarantine are hereby adopted:

4. Providing exemptions from the implementation of the
Enhanced Community Quarantine to the following
persons but with strict compliance to skeleton workforce

arrangement and strict social distancing:

rr

XXX
h. Employees of:

8. Power, Energy, Water, IT and Telecommunications
Supplies and Facilities, Waste Disposal Services”

Clearly, the LCE cannot prevent works involved with, or related to, water
service facilities during the ECQ. Hence, the National Irrigation Authority
or its personnel, who conducts an official work are exempted from the
implementation of the ECQ. Otherwise states, as long as the minimum
health standards and guidelines issued by the national government are
observed and complied with, they can still perform their respective duties
within the area declared to be under ECQ.

As a final note, may we remind Mayor Estrafero of Section 90() of
Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the “Local Government Code
of 1997”, which states:

“SECTION 90. Practice of Profession. — (a) All governors, city
and municipal mayors are prohibited from practicing their
profession or engaging in any occupation other than the
exercise of their functions as local chief executives.”

This Department had been consistent in its position that the afore-quoted
provision prohibits governors, city and municipal mayors from practicing
their profession or engage in any other occupation during their
incumbency, and this prohibition is absolute. The rationale being a
governor or mayor is a full time job. To allow the governor or mayor to
practice a profession or engage in other occupation may give rise to a
conflict of interest since he/she may be tempted to devote more time to
the practice of their profession or occupation that to the discharge of the
duties of his office’.

Lastly, with respect to the request for this Department to conduct an
investigation and file appropriate legal action against Mayor Estranero,
may we invite your attention to Section 61 of the LGC, which provides for
the venue on where to file the necessary action, to wit:

SECTION 61. Form and Filing of Administrative Complaints. — A
verified complaint against any erring local elective official shall
be prepared as follows:

(a) A complaint against any elective official of a province, a
highly urbanized city, an independent component city or
component city shall be filed before the Office of the President;

1 DILG Legal Opinion No. 26, Series of 2013, dated 07 August 2013

a

(b) A complaint against any elective official of a municipality shall
be filed before the sangguniang panlalawigan whose decision
may be appealed to the Office of the President; and

(c) A complaint against any elective barangay official shall be
filed before the sangguniang panlungsod or sangguniang bayan
concerned whose decision shall be final and executory.

Hence, it is suggested that the appropriate action be filed on the
abovementioned venue, and observe the procedures laid down in the

LGC.
We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you.

Very truly yours,

thority of the Secretary:

INGAN, CESO Iil
for Local Government

Legal/91

Copy Furnished:

DIR. ARACELI A. SAN JOSE
Officer-in-Charge, DILG-CAR
Barangay Center, Upper Session Road
Baguio City

