
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA comer Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG	OPINION	No.	67	s.2021
MAY 07 2021
HON. MARISSA Q. PADIRAYON
Vice-Mayor
Municipality of Sanchez Mira, Cagayan Office of the Vice-Mayor

Dear Vice-Mayor Padirayon:

This has reference to your letter dated 26 January 2021, in which you are seeking this Department's opinion in relation to Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) entered into between the Municipality of Sanchez Mira and Engr. Rogelio Pulido relative to a parcel of land.

According to your letter, in view of the nonexistence of an access road from the highway to the new Municipal Cemetery at Centro-07, Sanchez Mira, Cagayan, the Municipality of Sanchez Mira entered into a MOA with Engr. Rogelio Pulido regarding a parcel of land owned by the latter which will be donated to the LGU, subject to certain conditions relative to the construction of an access road.
Under the terms of the said MOA, Engr. Pulido will execute a Deed of Donation in favor of the LGU once the conditions stipulated therein, regarding the construction, are fulfilled by the Municipality of Sanchez Mira. However, after ocular inspection, it was proven that while there was partial compliance on part the LGU, the workmanship was not in conformity with the stipulations contained in the MOA.
As a result, Engr. Pulido expressed his discontentment and averred that if not acted upon, he may rescind the agreement and may not execute a Deed of Donation. For this reason, the Municipality of Sanchez Mira intends to propose for an additional budget for the improvement and completion of the project which shall be in conformity with the specifications in the MOA.
Under this premise arose the request for legal opinion on the propriety of the Municipality of Sanchez Mira to allocate a budget for the development of said parcel of land despite not having a Deed of Donation or Transfer Certificate of Title in favor of the Municipality.
At the outset, we would like to stress that this Department is a agency under the executive branch of the government and as such, 1t has  no



.,,
1

sanggunians, or any act committed by the members thereof which is alleged to be in violation of Republic Act No. 7160 otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991" (LGC) or other applicable laws. Only the courts have the authority to do so upon initiation of the appropriate action.
Moreover, in DILG Opinion No. 46, S. of 2020, it provides that this Department is proscribed by its internal rules as provided in Memorandum Circular No. 2010-02, to act on queries of the following kinds, to wit:
2. Those presumptively valid acts, e.g., enacted ordinances, consummated acts that already eniov the presumption of regularity on the part of the public officer concerned. and similar cases;

For this reason, we shall discuss only the provisions of law or rules which we deem applicable based on the representations in the letter.
In this case, considering there is yet a donation to speak of, the provisions of the New Civil Code regarding donations are not applicable. As such, the MOA is an ordinary agreement subject to the rule of autonomy or freedom to contract under our civil law.
Accordingly, considering that the MOA entered into by the LGU and Engr. Pulido are governed by the law on contracts, the parties to such contract are allowed to establish such stipulations, clauses, terms and conditions as they may deem convenient, provided they are not contrary to law, morals, good customs, public order or public policy. Correspondingly, both parties are bound by the terms contained in the contract and must fulfill their obligation.
In view thereof, this Department opines that the Municipality of Sanchez Mira may allocate a budget for the development of said parcel of land in order to fulfill its obligation under the MOA.
We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you.

Very truly yours,
By the Authority of the Secretary:



-V-l,.	,..,,,.1NGAN
cretary for Local Government
LLLS/32
COPY FURNISHED:
DIR. JONATHAN PAUL M. LEUSEN, JR.
Regional Director, DILG-Region II Carig, Regional Center Tuguegarao,Cagayan
