

Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilq.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 70 s.2021
19 May 2021
Punong Barangay Danao Barangay San Jaoquin Municipality of Palompon Province of Leyte

Dear Punong Barangay Danao:

     This has reference to the letter dated 4 February 2021 of Vice Mayor Ramon C. Onate, requesting for this Department's legal opinion on whether or not the Sangguniang Barangay is permitted to issue barangay clearance in favor of a business establishment in lieu of the refusal of the Punong Barangay to issue the same.

     The Department also received a letter dated 29 January 2021 from Ms. Sophia Noreene A. Onate, Chief Executive Director of the DBSN Farms Agriventures Corp., in her letter, she represented that, all of the statutory requirements were complied by the DBSN for purposes of securing business permit from the Mayor. However, the application for business permit was denied by Mayor Arevalo as the necessary barangay clearance was not secured from the Punong Barangay. Instead, the DBSN has secured a barangay resolution, giving the DBSN a barangay clearance.

     Foremost, we would like to inform that Section 152(c) of the Local Government Code of 1991 is already amended by Section 11(f) of Republic Act No. 11032, otherwise known as the "Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018", viz:

XXX
"(f) Barangay clearances and permits related to doing business shall be applied, issued, and collected at the city/municipality in accordance with the prescribed processing time of this Act: Provided, That the share in the collections shall be remitted to the respective barangays. "The pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as "The Local Government Code of 1991 ", specifically Article IV, Section 152(c) is hereby amended accordingly."
XXX

      It appears that the local government of Palompon, Leyte has not yet implemented Section 11 of RA No. 11032, wherein, LGUs are mandated to streamline the procedures for the issuance of local business licenses, clearances, permits certifications or authorizations.

     To properly guide you, we deem it proper to reiterate DILG Memorandum Circular No. 2019-177, re: GUIDELINES IN THE INTEGRATION OF THE ISSUANCE OF BARANGA Y CLEARANCE IN
THE PERMITTING PROCESSES OF CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES' for
your compliance.

     Nevertheless, for purposes of academic discussion, we emphasize that an application for a barangay clearance may be denied. Although the LGC did not mention the instances wherein an application for barangay clearance may be refused by the Punong Barangay, it has been our consistent view that if there is a national law or an ordinance violated, the Punong Barangay cannot issue a Barangay Clearance1.

     On the other hand, Section 152(c) of the LGC provides also for a remedy in case the application for clearance is not acted upon (in the herein case, the Punong Barangay refuses to issue the Barangay clearance) within seven (7) working days from the filing thereof. As clearly provided, in the event that the clearance is not issued within the said period, the city or municipality may issue the said license or permit. Hence, this level's answer to the query is in the negative.

     Your refusal to issue the barangay clearance is grounded on the complaints from the community about the foul odor emanating from the farm and indiscriminate dumping of chicken manure everywhere, but the Municipal Sanitary Inspector invalidated such allegations.

     Most importantly, a DBSN is a major part of the food chain, and there will be serious consequences that may arise as a result of denying DBSN's business permit application.

     While we agree that barangay clearance cannot be issued through a resolution as the same falls within your power, may we know your justification/s in denying DBSN's barangay clearance despite compliance with the statutory requirements. Otherwise, we instruct you to issue the




1 DILG Legal Opinion No. 94, Series of 2010 dated 22 June 2010

same, especially that, there is neither national law nor ordinance being violated.

Thank you.

Very truly yours,
By Aut	·	ecretary:
Undersecretary for Barangay Affairs
LS/90

Copy furnished:

DIR. KARL CAESAR R. RIMANDO
Regional Director, DILG Region VIII Kanhuraw Hill, Tacloban City

HON. MYRA GEORGINA AREVALO
Mayor
Municipality of Palompon Province of Leyte

HON. RAMON C. ONATE
Vice Mayor
Municipality of Palompon Province of Leyte

MS. SOPHIA NOREENE A. ONATE
Chief Executive Director
DBSN Farms Agriventures Corp. Brgy. Antipolo, Albure, Leyte
