
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, Wes Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 62 s.2021
05 MAY 2021
MR. VICENTE M. BARLOS
Pangulo
Alliance of Peoples Organization in Lupang Arenda (APOLA) Barangay Sta. Ana, Taytay, Rizal

Dear Mr. Barios

     This has reference to your letter dated 30 October 2020, in which you are requesting for this Departments legal opinion regarding the rights of the residents of Barangay Sta. Ana in relation to the renovation of the "talipapa" located i'n Purok 2 Lupang Arenda, Barangay Sta. Ana, Taytay, Rizal.

     Per your letter in 2014, Barangay Sta. Ana then represented by its Punong Barangay Joselito T. Calderon, entered into a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with one Mr. Fernando Hernandez, owner of the right of a lot which would be converted into a market or 'talipapa".

     Under the terms of the MOA, the subject lot would serve as a market ('talipapa) in order to address the clogging of the street and to organize the sidewalk vendors along Ynares Avenue, Lupang Arenda. In addition, the provision of the MOA provides that the payment of two hundred twenty thousand pesos (PhP 220 000.00) to Mr. Fernando Hernandez would entitle the barangay to have the rights over the land and as payment for improvement such as the footing and beam structures within the lot.

     Subsequently, Punong Barangay Joselito T. Calderon died and the APOLA alleges that the design of the "talipapa has been renovated, and that such alteration has made it seem that the market has been privatized. Moreover, APOLA claims that the previous vendors of the "talipapa" have been swept aside due to the transformation of the structure.

     Under this premise arose the request for legal opinion regarding the following issues:

1. Whether the residents of the barangay have a right to invoke that the previous vendors be allowed to occupy and use the renovated "talipapa'•?

2. Whether the barangay officials have incurred legal liability for allowing the "talipapa" to be renovated?

     At the outset, we would like to stress that this Department is an agency under the executive branch of the government and as such, it has no authority to declare invalid any ordinance or resolution of the local sanggunians, or any act committed by the members thereof which is alleged to be in violation of Republic Act No. 7160 otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991" (LGC) or other applicable laws. Only the courts have the authority to do so upon initiation of the appropriate action.

     Moreover, in DILG Opinion No. 46, S. of 2020, it provides that this Department is proscribed by its internal rules as provided in Memorandum Circular No. 2010-02, to act on queries of the following kinds, to wit:

2. Those presumptively valid acts, e.g., enacted ordinances, consummated acts that already enJoy the presumption of regularity on the part of the public officer concerned, and similar cases;

     For this reason, we shall discuss only the provisions of law or rules which we deem applicable based on the representations in the letter.

     Be that as it may, considering that the queries are interrelated, this Department deems it proper to address the issues in one discussion.

     To begin with, this Department would like to cite the pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 7160 otherwise known as the "Local
Government Code of 1991" (LGC) on the power of local government units (LGU) to enter into contracts, to wit

SECTION 15. Political and Corporate Nature of Local Government Units. - Every local government unit created or recognized under this Code is a body politic and corporate endowed with powers to be exercised by it in conformity with law. As such, it shall exercise powers as a political subdivision of the national government and as a corporate entity representing the inhabitants of its territory.

SECTION 22. Corporate Powers. - (a) Every local government unit, as a corporation, shall have the following powers: xxx
(4) To acquire and convey f.!!i!Lor personal property:
(5) To enter into contracts: xxx

     Particularly, Section 389(b)(2) of the LGC, authorizes the Punong Barangay, as the Chief Executive of the barangay government, to negotiate, enter into, and sign contracts for and in behalf of the barangay, upon authorization of the sangguniang barangay, which is also mandated by Section 391(a)(12) of the LGC. Accordingly, it is this Department's considered view that the term "contract" includes that of a Memorandum of Agreement, and such is a valid exercise of its proprietary power pursuant to Section 15 of the LGC.

     In this regard, considering that the purpose of executing the MOA with Mr. Fernando Hernandez was to use, construct, and convert the lot to a market, this Department Is of the opinion that, despite the renovation, it is still consistent with the specific purpose on why the rights over the lot was paid for by the barangay. Hence, the barangay officials did not incur any liability in allowing the alteration of the design of the "talipapa".

     Albeit the foregoing, as to the allegation by APOLA that the "talipapa" has been privatized, this Department has requested for the comments of the officials of Barangay Sta. Ana, in order for us to have sufficient understanding of the facts, which would allow us to properly address the pertinent issues and enable us to provide a comprehensive guideline or opinion on the matter

Thank you.

LLLS/32

CC:	DIR. ARIEL 0. IGLESIA
Reglonal Director, DILG-Region IV-A (CALABARZON) 3rd Floor, Anderson Bldg. I, Brgy. Parian, Calamba City
