
Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City http://www.dilg.com.ph
DILG OPINION No. 54 s.2021
19 April 2021

HON. KURT MATTHEW T. TEVES
Sangguniang Panlalawigan Member Province of Negros Oriental
LNB Provincial President Dear Hon. Teves:
This has reference to your letter dated 09 November 2020 in which you are requesting for the nullification of the proceedings of the Provincial Development Council (PDC) Executive Committee after being rescheduled without concurrence from the PDC Board.

According to your letter addressed to Governor Roel Ragay Degamo, Province of Negros Oriental, a virtual meeting via Zoom application of the Executive Committee of the Provincial Development Council was originally scheduled on 29 October 2020 at 1:00 P.M. However, for reasons unbeknownst, the schedule was summarily changed to a later date and time, which was 30 October 2020. As a result, you were unable to attend and participate on the said meeting.

For this reason, you are protesting the propriety of the proceedings of the PDC Execom held last 30 October 2020 at 10:00 A.M.

At the outset, we would like to stress that this Department is an agency under the executive branch of the government and as such, it has no authority to declare invalid any ordinance or resolution of the local sanggunians, or any act committed which is alleged to be in violation of Republic Act No. 7160 otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991" (LGC) or other applicable laws. Only the courts have the authority to do so upon initiation of the appropriate action.










Moreover, in DILG Opinion No. 46, S. of 2020, it provides that this Department is proscribed by its internal rules as provided in Memorandum Circular No. 2010-02, to act on queries of the following kinds, to wit:

2. Those presumptively valid acts, e.g., enacted ordinances, consummated acts that already enjoy the presumption of regularity on the part of the public officer concerned, and similar cases;

For this reason, we shall discuss only the provisions of law or rules which we deem applicable based on the representations in the letter.

This Department deems it proper to highlight the pertinent provisions of the LGC, as amended, and its Implementing Rules and Regulations in relation to local development councils and its executive committees, to wit:

SECTION 111. Executive Committee. - (a) Each local development council shall create an executive committee to represent it and act in its behalf when it is not in session.

(b) The executive committee shall exercise the following powers and functions

(1) Ensure that the decision of the council are faithfully carried out and implemented;
(2) Act on matters requiring immediate attention or action by
the council;
(3) Formulate policies, plans, and programs based on the general principles laid down by the council; and
(4) Act on other matters that may be authorized by the council.

(3) Meetings - The executive committee shall hold its meetings at least once a month. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by a majority of its members.

Accordingly, considering that the LGC and its IRR only provide for the composition, general powers and functions of the Executive Committee and mandating it to hold a meeting at least once a month, this Department is of the view that the proceedings of the Executive Committee are governed by its internal rules and procedures regarding its internal affairs which includes, regular and special meetings and quorum requirements, among others.










In view thereof, this Department opines that so long as the acts performed by the Executive Committee are not beyond the authority or scope of its power granted to them under the law, for instance, acting on matters that need immediate attention and those matters authorized by the Provincial Development Council, except the approval of local development plans and annual investment plans, then such acts are valid. Correspondingly, the holding of the meeting, albeit the rescheduling without concurrence from the PDC Board, is valid on the condition that its internal rules and proceedings were complied with.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary opinion of competent authorities and the courts.
We hope to have assisted you accordingly. Thank you. Very truly yours,



LLLS/32

Copy furnished:

DIR. LEOCADIO T. TROVELA, CESO IV
Regional Director, Region VII Sudlon, Lahug, Cebu City




