Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City
http://www.dilg.com.ph

DILG OPINION No. 18 s.2021
3 February 2021

HON. SHIERRE ANN PORTALES-PALICPIC
Mayor, Municipality of Pagbilao, Quezon

Rizal Street, Sta. Catalina

Pagbilao, Quezon

Dear Mayor Portales-Palicpic:

This has reference to your letter dated 11 June 2020 addressed to
Noemi M. Pelaez, MGLOO, Pagbilao, Quezon, requesting guidance on the
following matters:

1. Is the Provincial legal Officer correct in denying your request to be
represented in your official capacity as municipal mayor in filing an
administrative case against Vice-Mayor Joseph P. Garcia, of the same
Municipality, on the basis of Section 481 of the Local Government
Code?

2. Assuming that the Provincial Legal Officer is correct, who shall
represent you in filing the administrative case for misconduct against
another local elective official of the municipality in view of the
prohibition against private lawyers from representing public officials in
cases filed in their official capacities?

3. In relation to the above, does Section 481(b)(3)(iv) of the LGC preclude
the Provincial Legal Attorney from representing you in an
administrative case that you intend to file in your official capacity
against another local elective official of the same municipality?

As a background, on 05 March 2020, you requested the assistance of,
and representation by, Atty. Geofflyn D. San Agustin, Provincial Legal
Officer, in an administrative case you intend to file before the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan or Office of the Ombudsman, against Vice-Mayor Joseph C.

Garcia, Pagbilao, Quezon on the ground of gross failure to act and/or
respond to your letters, thus, violative of Section 5(a) of Republic Act No.
6713.

However, the same was denied by Atty. San Agustin in a letter dated
21 May 2020, based on Section 481 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise
known as “Local Government Code of 1991” (LGC). He argued that
Provincial Legal Officers have no authority to prosecute administrative cases
against local officials whether before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan or
Office of the Ombudsman. Instead, their powers are limited to investigate
and recommend appropriate action on administrative cases filed before the
Local Chief Executive or Sanggunian. Additionally, it was mentioned therein
that the only time when they can use their authority as Provincial Legal
Officer is when a verified complaint has been filed before the Sangguniang

Panlalawigan.

Hence, these queries.

With respect to the first query, we are of the view that the Provincial
Legal Officer is justified in denying the aforesaid request of representation in
the filing of an administrative case.

Pertinent in the herein discussion is Section 481(b)(3)(i) of the LGC,
which provides:

“Section 481. Qualifications, Terms, Powers and Duties
(3) In addition to the foregoing duties and functions, the legal
officer shall:
(i) Represent the local government unit in all civil
actions and special proceedings wherein the local

government unit or any official thereof, in his official
capacity, is a party: Provided, That, in actions or

proceedings where a component city or municipality is a
party adverse to the provincial government or to another
component city or municipality, a special legal officer may
be employed to represent the adverse party; (Emphasis

and Underscoring supplied)”

Moreover, please be informed that this Department has already
answered a similar query in DILG Opinion No. 7, Series of 2011, dated 17
March 2011, wherein we opined that:

“As a general rule, a municipality cannot engage the services of a
private lawyer. Only the Provincial Prosecutor, the Provincial
Attorney or the Municipal Attorney could validly represent a
municipality in all cases/complaints and legal problems involving it.
The reason being that only accountable public officers may act for
and in behalf of public entities and that public funds should not be
expended to hire private lawyers (Ramos vs. Court of Appeals, 269
SCRA 34). Thus, in case of Ramos vs. Court of Appeals, 108 SCRA
728, the Supreme Court was rather emphatic when it declared that
a private lawyer cannot represent a local government unit even if
the services rendered was gratis, and stated that ‘the municipality
should not be burdened with expenses of hiring a private lawyer
and that interests of the municipality would be best protected if a
government lawyer handles its litigation.’

However, in the case of Mancenido, et.al vs. Court of Appeals, the
Supreme Court enumerated several exceptions to the general rule
discussed above, to wit:

1. Only when the provincial fiscal is disqualified may the
municipal council be authorized to hire the services of a

Special attorney;

2. The provincial public prosecutor is disqualified from
representing a particular municipality: (a) when the
jurisdiction of a case involving the municipalities lies with the
Supreme Court; (b) when the municipality is a party adverse
to the Provincial Government or to some other municipality
in the same province; and (c) when in a case involving the
municipality, the provincial prosecutor, his spouse, or his
child is involved as a creditor, heir, legatee or otherwise;

3. In resolving whether a local government official may secure
the services of a private counsel in an action filed against
him in his official capacity, the nature of the action and the
relief sought are to be considered.” (Emphasis Ours)

Moreover, COA Circular No. 98-002 is instructive, which states that
“with respect to local government units, only in those instances provided in
paragraph 3(1) of Section 481 of RA 7160, which states, thus: ‘xx Provided,
that, in actions or proceedings where a component city or municipality is a
party adverse to the provincial government or to another component city or
municipality, a special legal officer may be employed to represent the
adverse party,’ may public funds be utilized for the services of a private legal

counsel or law firm”.

Hence, as a rule, the Provincial Legal Officer has the sworn duty to
represent local government officials in their capacities as such, in all civil
actions and special proceedings wherein the local government unit or any
official thereof, in his official capacity, is a party thereto. However, the case
intended to be filed against Vice Mayor Garcia is an administrative case,
which is not one of the cases wherein the Provincial Prosecutor, Provincial
Attorney or the Municipal Attorney can validly represent.

Ergo, the Provincial Legal Officer is precluded to handle cases which
are administrative in nature notwithstanding the fact that the local
government official, in this case the local chief executive, shall file the same
in his/her capacity as such. To allow the Provincial Legal Officer to represent
you in your official capacity as the local chief executive of the Municipality,
would create an absurd situation wherein you can be represented by the
Provincial Legal Officer, while Vice Mayor will not, despite the fact that the
latter is likewise sued in his official capacity as such.

Accordingly, in those instances wherein a Provincial Legal Officer is
precluded to represent the local government unit and/or its government
officers, hiring of private lawyer is permitted, provided the requirements of
the law, and pertinent rules and regulations be complied with.

This opinion is being rendered without prejudice to any contrary
opinion of competent authorities and the courts.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter. Thank you.

Very truly yours,
ority of the Secretary

Legal/91

Copy furnished:
DIRECTOR ARIEL O. IGLESIA
Regional Director, DILG-CALABARZON
3/F Andenson Bldg. 1, National Highway
Brgy. Parian, Calamba City, Laguna

