Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT


25 July 2006

MR. EDILBERTO M. LOZADA
Sangguniang Panlungsod Member
Chairman, Committee on Rules and Laws
City Hall, Valenzuela City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter raising some concerns on DILG Opinion No. 23-
2006 wherein we opined that the creation of a barangay in Valenzuela City can
also be done by an act of the Sangguniang Panlungsod and not necessarily or
solely by an act of Congress.

You said that your Committee came up with a report that the power to
create a barangay within Metro Manila is vested only with Congress. Your
findings is based on Article 14 (b), Rule 11 of the Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR) of the Local Government Code which in pertinent provides:

"xxx (b) New barangays in the municipalities within MMA shall be created only by Act of Congress, subject to
limitations and requirements prescribed in this article xxx." (underlining ours)

Relative to this, you inquired and we quote:

"In view of the conflicting pronouncements from your
office, will it be safe for us to assume that your recent
opinion has the effect to an amendment to the Rules and
Regulations issued by DILG on Barangay Creation?"

With all due respect, we maintain that DILG Opinion No. 23-2006 wherein
we opined that the creation of barangays in Valenzuela City can also be done by
an act of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of that city and not only by an act of
Congress did not result to a conflicting pronouncement of this Department.

At the outset, may we emphasize that the power to create barangays was
delegated by Congress, through Sections 6 and 385 of the Local Government
Code, to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan and Sangguniang Panlungsod, as the case
may be. It is noted that the Sangguniang Bayan has no power to create a
barangay but, nonetheless, the recommendation of the Sangguniang Bayan of the
municipality where the proposed barangay is located is required by the Local
Government Code before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan can create a new
barangay. Along this line, may we note that the aforesaid Article 14 (b) of Rule 11
of the said IRR states and we quote in part: "New barangays in the municipalities
within MMA shall be created only by an act of Congress". Said provision of the
IRR does not mention the creation of barangays in cities but only in municipalities
within Metro Manila. The wisdom behind this provision of the IRR why it
mentioned only municipalities within Metro Manila is the fact that in Metro
Manila, there is no Sangguniang Panlalawigan that can create a new barangay for
the said municipalities. Hence, it would thus become very logical that in such a
situation, only an act of Congress can create a barangay in said municipalities.
The creation of a new barangay in cities within Metro Manila is not covered by
the said IRR because, precisely, the Sangguniang Panlungsod of that city is given
the power to create a barangay.

Stated differently, there being no power on the part of the Sangguniang
Bayan in municipalities within Metro Manila to create a barangay, and there being
also no Sangguniang Panlalawigan in Metro Manila which can create a barangay
in said municipalities, the logical conclusion is - barangays in municipalities
within Metro Manila are to be created only by an act of Congress.

The foregoing considered, since Valenzuela City, though located in Metro
Manila, is a city, the restrictive provision in Article 14 (b), Rule II of the IRR of the
Local Government Code that only Congress can create a barangay cannot be
made to apply. Your Sangguniang Panlungsod, being vested with the power to
create a new barangay, can also create the same.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,


WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal:68/La
cc: Director Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG-NCR
Cubao, Quezon City