REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II EDSA cor. Magsaysay St.
Diliman, Quezon City

                             OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

                      17 March 2008

ATTY. ALEJANDRO R. ABESAMIS
Provincial Administrator
Provincial Capitol Building
Palayan City, Nueva Ecija

Dear Atty. Abesamis:

This pertains to your request for legal opinion with regard to the legality of the actions made by Vice Governor Edward Thomas L Joson, in his capacity as Acting Governor, during the temporary absence of Governor Aurelio M. Umali.

You represented that on 14 March 2008, Vice Governor Joson, as Acting Governor, issued several memoranda (Memorandum Nos. 02-21, s. 2008) which, according to you, effectively appoints or suspends essential personnel of the Provincial Government, in contravention of the limitations provided for under Section 46 of the Local Government Code.

• A reading of the series of memoranda would reveal that Vice Governor Joson, as acting governor, directed certain officials and employees of the Provincial Government to assume and perform the functions of certain offices, which effectively replaced the officials earlier assigned by Governor Umali to perform the functions of the offices concerned. Hence, your query.

Section 46 (a) of the Local Government Code provides:

"(a) When the governor, city or municipal mayor,
or punong barangay, is temporarily incapacitated to
perform the duties for physical or legal reasons such
as, but not limited to, leave of absence, travel abroad,
and suspension from office, the vice governor, city or
municipal vice mayor, or the highest ranking
sangguniang barangay member, shall automatically
exercise the powers and perform the duties and
functions of the local chief executive concerned, except
the power to appoint, suspend, or dismiss employees,
which can only be exercised if the period of temporary
incapacity exceed thirty (30) working days." 

(underlining ours)

From the aforementioned provision of the Local
Government Code, it is clear that the Vice Governor, as Acting Governor due to the temporary incapacity of the Governor, shall automatically exercise all the powers and perform all the duties and functions of the Governor except the power to appoint, suspend or dismiss employees, which can only be exercised if the period of temporary incapacity exceeds 30 working days.

From the tenor of the several memoranda issued by the Acting Governor, it is clear that he directed certain officials and employees of the Provincial Government to perform the functions of certain offices thereto.

Appointment is defined as "the selection, by the authority vested with the power, of an individual who is to perform the functions of a given office" (Outline Review in Political Law Review by Antonio B. Nachura, p. 432). In the case of Borromeo vs. Mariano (41 Phil. 322), appointment was also defined as "the act of designation by the executive officer, board, or body to whom that power has been delegated, of the individual who is to exercise the functions of a given office".

With the definition given on "appointment", we are of the view that the series of memoranda issued by Acting Governor Joson could well fall within the meaning and contemplation of the word "appoint" found in Section 46 (a) of the Local Government Code since it directed certain officials other than those officials earlier designated by Governor Umali to perform the functions of certain offices. Such being the case and per the limitations on the powers of the Acting Governor under Section 46 (a) of the Local Government Code, the subject series of memoranda should have only been issued by the Acting Governor at a time when the temporary incapacity of the Governor shall have already exceeded thirty (30) working days.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

Legal:43/La

cc: Director Abraham Pascua
DILG Provincial Field Office
Cabanatuan City

Director Josefina Castilla-Go
DILG Provincial Field Office
San Fernando City, Pampanga