Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg. EDSA
corner Mapagmalhal Street, Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. OBREN M. TAN
Vice Mayor
Burd eos, Quezon

April 10, 2008

Dear Vice Mayor Tan:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on whether or not DILG Opinion No. 95 series of 1996 which pronounced that "the power of general supervision of the Municipal Mayor, insofar as the official trips of Municipal officials are concerned, extends to the sangguniang bayan members and employees" has already been amended.

In reply to your query, please be informed that we maintain the principle under DILG Opinion No. 95 series of 1996 that the municipal mayor shall "authorize official trips outside of the municipality of municipal officials and employees for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days." [Section 4. (xv) of the Local Government Code].

However, for further clarification, may we quote our reply to a similar query concerning the authority of the Municipal Mayor regarding the signing of travel order of the Sanggunian Officials and their employees, as follows:

"If the Vice Mayor’s travel and/or that of the Members of the Sanggunian Bayan is chargeable to the general fund of the municipality, the approval of the Mayor is discretionary because under Section 44 (b)(1)(ex) of the Local Government Code of 1991, the Municipal Mayor, being the chief executive who exercises general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services and activities of the municipal government, is given the sole prerogative to authorize official trips outside of the municipality of municipal officials and employees. This is part and parcel of the executive function of the municipal mayor.

On the other hand, if such travel is chargeable to the sanggunian funds, the recommendation of the Vice Mayor is necessary and the approval of the Mayor becomes a ministerial function because under Section 45 (a)(1) of the same code, the Vice Mayor is given the authority to sign all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the sanggunian bayan. The Sanggunian, through the Vice Mayor, is actually acting as a legislative body of the local government unit (LGU) and operating on a separate budget though forming part of the entire budget of the municipality. As such, it becomes a duty on the part of the municipal mayor to authorize, including the issuance of correspondence travel order thereto to members of the sanggunian bayan and its employees whenever the vice mayor had already issued his/her prior recommendation and had already signed the warrant drawn on the municipal treasury for all expenditures necessary for such official travel" (DILG Opinion No. 33, s. 2005).

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary