REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

23 October 2007

MAYOR NANETTE B. TANSINGCO
San Fernando, Romblon

Dear Mayor Tansingco:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking our legal opinion on
the following queries, which we quoted herein in toto:

"1) Is the power of the municipal Mayor in the issuance
of a permit a discretionary or ministerial one?

2) In either case, what would be the available
remedies to the party seeking approval of the permit."

In reply to your first query, please be informed that while it is true
that pursuant to Section 444 (b) (3) (iv) of the Local Government Code of
1991 (RA 7160), the Municipal Mayor is empowered to issue licenses and
permits and may revoke the same for any violation of the conditions upon
which said licenses or permits have been issued pursuant to a law or
ordinance, the exercise of such power, however, depends on whether or
not all the requirements set forth by law or ordinance for its issuance are
duly complied with such that once all the requirements are met and
complied with, the issuance of the applied mayor's permit becomes purely
ministerial and not discretionary. The power to issue mayor's
permit/license is an administrative function of the Mayor attached to the
office and not a business contract or transactions.

This conclusion is supported by the decision of the Supreme Court
in the case of Chinese Flour Importers Union vs. Price Stabilization Board (89
Phil. 839) where it was ruled to the effect that the Mayor should be guided
by law or ordinance in the issuance of a license

which could result in uncontrolled power as it rests in the Mayor an
arbitrary discretion, without a policy, rule or standard of which it can be
measured or controlled.

In reply to your second query, your available remedy/ies would be as
follows: If the application for business permit is initially denied because
not all the requirements set forth by law or ordinance for its issuance are
met/submitted, the remedy of the applicant business establishment would
simply be that of completing the requirements. On the other hand, if the
application for business permit is denied despite compliance by the
business establishment concerned of all the requirements, the owner of the
applicant business establishment may file before the appropriate court a
special civil action for mandamus under Rule 65 of the Revised Rules of
Court in order to compel the mayor to issue the same. The Special Civil
Action of Mandamus can be resorted to since as earlier stated, the
issuance of the mayor's permit becomes ministerial once all the
requirements for its issuance were duly complied with. Said business may
likewise incorporate therein a prayer for damages to answer whatever
monetary prejudice the owner may have incurred due to the unjustified
refusal of the Mayor in the issuance of the same.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

Legal:09/17

cc: Director Rolando L. Rafael
DILG Region IV-B
Santos & Sons Building
Aurora Blvd., Cubao
Quezon City