Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA corner Mapagmalan St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY
JUC OPINION NO. 53 S. 2007
July 11, 2007

MR. BUENAVENTURA D. TAGUINOD
3311 Santiago City

Dear Mr. Taguinod:

This has reference to your letter query regarding the following issues, to wit:
(1) Whether or not the functions and duties of appointive barangay officials shall be governed by barangay ordinances in a legislative process;
(2) Whether the basic pay of barangay officials (elective and appointive) is considered salary?

Anent your first query, Section 396 of the Local Government Code of 1991 provides and we quote:

"Section 396. Other Appointive Officials - The qualifications, duties and functions of all other barangay officials appointed by the punong barangay shall be governed by this Code and other laws or by barangay ordinances."

The aforestated provision of law is clear. Well-settled is the rule in statutory construction that when the law speaks in clear and categorical language, there is no reason for interpretation or construction, but only for application.

In relation thereto, Section 387 of the Local Government Code, provides:

"Section 387. Chief officials and offices -
(a) There shall be in each barangay a punong barangay, seven (7) sangguniang barangay members, the sangguniang kabataan chairman, a barangay secretary, and a barangay treasurer.

(b) There shall also be in every barangay a lupong tagapamayapa. The sangguniang barangay may form community brigades and create such other positions or offices as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of the barangay government in accordance with the needs of public service, subject to the budgetary limitations on personal services prescribed under Title Five, Book II of this Code."

Base on the foregoing, the Sangguniang Barangay is empowered to create such other positions or offices as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of the barangay government in accordance with the needs of public service, subject to the budgetary limitations on personal services prescribed under Title Five, Book II of the Local Government Code. Accordingly, therefore, the Sangguniang barangay, through an ordinance, may create other positions not mandatorily created by the Code. Such power to create includes the power to prescribe the qualification standards of the positions to be created and the duties, powers and functions of the incumbent.

As regards the second query, we answer in the negative. Please be informed that pursuant to Local Budget Circular No. 66 dated 04 March, 1998, barangay officials are compensated in the form of honorarium. Honorarium is different from a salary. Honorarium is defined by the Supreme Court in the case of Santiago vs. Commission on Audit (G.R. No. 92284, 12 July 1991), as something given not as a matter of obligation but in appreciation for services rendered, a voluntary donation in consideration of services which admit of no compensation in money. On the contrary, salary is defined as something given as a matter of right in recompense for services rendered.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
OIC, USLG