Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahalan St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

April 26, 2006

MR. HAI SOY S. TAN
Unique Agri-Commercial Corporation
Captain Cooper Street, San Jose
Occidental Mindoro

Dear Mr. Tan:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking our legal opinion
concerning the extent of the powers of the Sangguniang Bayan to reclassify
lands, the extent of the review power of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, and the
consequence of non-compliance by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan with the
reglementary period requirement within which to review Sangguniang Bayan
ordinances.

Per your letter, Unique Agri-Commercial Corporation (UACC) applied for a
development permit with the Municipality of San Jose, Occidental Mindoro for its
Saint Virginia's Memorial Garden (SVMG) project with its site at Barangay Bubog
of said municipality. UACC was required by the Municipal Planning and
Development Coordinator to secure from the Sangguniang Bayan a
reclassification (agricultural to non-agricultural) of the lot where SVMG project
has to be undertaken. Accordingly, Ordinance No. 697, s. 04, was passed on
February 9, 2004, entitled "An Ordinance Reclassifying from Agricultural to
Non-agricultural Use a Parcel of Land containing an Area of 40,961 Square
Meters, located in Barangay Bubog, this Municipality, titled under TCT No. T-
13737, described as Lot No. 1633-B-7 of the Subdivision Plan PSD-04-088174 in
the name of Unique Agri-Commercial Corporation represented by Mr. Hai Soy
Tan". Said ordinance was transmitted to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for
review on February 25, 2004. In its Resolution dated August 2, 2004, the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan disapproved the aforesaid ordinance citing the
following as reasons which we shall quote in toto:

1. The topographical characteristics is not suited for cemetery
considering the shallow water level, and that converting the
same as cemetery site might contaminate the water within the
vicinity.

2. Considering that the adjacent lands are presently being used for
agricultural production, conversion of said lot into a cemetery
may result to economic dislocation of farmers in the area;

3. Reclassification of land should adhere or conform with
approved comprehensive land use plan of the municipality"

In response thereto, the UACC filed a request for reconsideration of the
foregoing disapproval to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. The latter body, in turn,
endorsed UACC's request for reconsideration to the Sangguniang Bayan for
comment. The Sangguniang Bayan recommended to the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan that said request for reconsideration be given a favorable
response. The Sangguniang Panlalawigan nevertheless denied UACC's request
for reconsideration.

Hence, you now seek our legal opinion on the following issues, which we
reproduce in toto from your letter:

1) "Does the Sangguniang Bayan acted within the scope of its
authority when it enacted the said Municipal Ordinance
reclassifying a parcel of land without taking into
consideration other laws, rules and regulations and policies
that are national in scope which governed the processes in
memorial park project?

2) The legal effects on the failure of the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan to act within thirty (30) day period as required
by law for the review of Sangguniang Bayan Ordinance No.
697, series of 2004.

3) Are we in estoppel for having written the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan upon the directive of the Sangguniang Bayan
after the thirty (30) day limitation as imposed by Section 56 of
the Local Government Code of 1991?

4) Does the Sangguniang Panlalawigan acted within the scope of
its authority when it conducted functions belonging to
the Sangguniang Bayan such as public consultations, hearing and
entertaining petitioners during the review of said Municipal
Ordinance?