Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

M.L.C. OPINION NO. 16 S. 2005
15 February 2005

MAYOR JESSE B. CASTILLO
Bacoor, Cavite

Dear Mayor Castillo:

This has reference to your letter, requesting for legal opinion on the following issues: (1) quorum; (2) time of submission of enacted ordinance to the Office of the Mayor; and (3) declaration of state of calamity by the sanggunian.

As could be inferred from your letter, you particularly raised questions on the following issues:

1. What is the required number of sanggunian members present in order to constitute a quorum?

2. Is there a prescribed time within which the sanggunian shall submit an enacted ordinance to the Municipal Mayor for his approval?

3. Are Members of the Sanggunian Bayan required to sign on the enacted ordinance? If so, what are the liabilities if they refuse to sign for varied reasons, one of which is their demand for something in exchange of signing an enacted ordinance?

4. In declaring a state of calamity, what is the required number of sanggunian members to be present in order to constitute a quorum when one member of that sanggunian is on leave?

5. If the province declares a calamity, is it still necessary for the Sanggunian Bayan to pass a resolution declaring also the municipality under a state of calamity?

6. If there is a national declaration of a state of calamity, is the municipal government still required to declare its own state of calamity?

In reply to your first query, it bears stressing that your Sanggunian Bayan is composed of eight (8) regular members; the Liga ng mga Barangay President, the SK Federation President and the Vice Mayor as Presiding Officer.

May it be noted that in our long line of opinions, we consistently opined that the number of the Vice Mayor as Presiding Officer should be included in determining the number of quorum. The inclusion of the number of the Vice Mayor in determining the number of quorum was further bolstered by the Decision of the Supreme Court in Gamboa vs. Aguirre (310 SCRA 867, 20 July 1999), where the Supreme Court ruled that when the Vice Mayor becomes the Acting Mayor, he is not anymore allowed to continue to preside over the sanggunian session as he will be expected to perform full-time executive functions.

Moreover, Section 446 (a) of the Local Government Code provides, thus:

"SEC. 446. Composition.- (a) The sangguniang bayan, the legislative body of the municipality, shall be composed of the municipal vice mayor as the presiding officer, the regular sanggunian members, the president of the municipal chapter of the liga ng mga barangay, the president of the pambayang federasyon ng mga sangguniang kabataan, and the sectoral representatives, as members."

The foregoing would clearly show that the Vice Mayor, as Presiding Officer, is a composite member of the sanggunian. Hence, the intriguing issue as to whether or not the number of the Presiding Officer is to be included in determining the quorum of the sanggunian has already been resolved with the advent of the new Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160). The dilemma as to whether or not the number of the Presiding Officer is to be included in determining the number of quorum of the sanggunian was brought about by the fact that under the old Local Government Code (Batas Pambansa Blg. 337), the Presiding Officer then of the sanggunian was the Mayor.

Hence, from the foregoing disquisition, it becomes clearer now that the legislative intent and the judicial wisdom is to provide a complete separation of powers and functions between the Mayor, as the Local Chief Executive, and the Vice Mayor, as the Presiding Officer and a composite member of the sanggunian, and thus performing legislative functions.

Accordingly, in a sanggunian with eight (8) regular members, two ex-officio members representing the Liga ng mga Barangay and the SK Federation and the Vice-Mayor as Presiding Officer, the total number of membership in that sanggunian, therefore, is eleven (11). Relative thereto, Section 53 of the Local Government Code provides that a majority of all the members of the sanggunian who have been elected and qualified shall constitute a quorum to transact official business. Hence, as defined by law, quorum is the majority of all the members of that sanggunian. "Majority" has been defined by jurisprudence as that which is 50% plus 1 or that which is greater than half of the membership of the body. We note, however, that using either formula will still give the same result. For instance, if the membership of the sanggunian is 15, it 11 divided by 2 will give us 5.5. Hence, 5.5 plus 1 will give us 6.5. It is noted, however, that there can never be a fractional member of a sanggunian. Hence, the more appropriate thing to do is go down to the next lower whole number, which is 6. Corollary thereto, if we take the relationship of 6 vis-Ã -vis 5.5, 6 is definitely greater than 5.5, hence, 6 is greater than Â½ of 11.

Under Section 49 of the same Code, if there are 6 members of your sanggunian present, but the Vice Mayor is absent, then the 6 members, which number already constitutes a quorum, shall elect from among themselves the Temporary Presiding Officer in the sanggunian. This applies to both regular and special sessions of the sanggunian.

In reply to your second and third queries, may we note that Section 54 of the Code provides:

"SEC. 54. Approval of Ordinances.- (a) Every ordinance enacted by the xxx sangguniang bayan shall be presented to the xxx municipal mayor, as the case