Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
B. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT



March 8, 2006

MR. NEIL C. RONQUILLO
Administrative Officer 1
Municipality of Maria Aurora
Province of Aurora

Dear Mr. Ronquillo:

This has reference to your letter-query in connection with the 90-day
preventive suspension ordered by the RTC against the Municipal Vice
Mayor and five (5) of your Sangguniang Bayan Members, as a result of a
criminal case filed against them, leaving the current total membership of
the Sangguniang Bayan to only five (5).

Hence, you sought our legal opinion on the following queries which
we reproduced in toto:

"1) Whether or not temporary appointment could be made so that
temporary sangguniang members could temporary replace the
suspended SB Members during the period of their preventive
suspension? If affirmative, (a) what could be the legal basis? (b)
who shall appoint? (c) from what party affiliation the appointee
would come from?

2) If an appointment could be legally made, whether or not the
temporary sangguniang members could enjoy the rights and
privileges of a regular sangguniang members?"

In reply thereto, please be informed that you have two (2) options
for which to remedy the temporary vacancies in your sanggunian, to wit:

a) By applying Supreme Court jurisprudence, the remaining sangguniang
bayan members may still transact official business since quorum is
effectively reduced as a result of the preventive suspension of other
members; or

b) In order to maintain as much as possible the widest representation in
the sangguniang bayan, to request HEPGMA to appoint temporarily,
five (5) individuals as members of the SB in view of the power of the
President of the Republic to appoint "all other officers of the

government whose appointments are not provided for by law (Section
16, Art. VII, 1987 Constitution).

With regard to the first option, well-settled is the rule that the
sangguniang shall transact official business only when there is the
presence, in a particular session, of at least a majority of all the members who have
been elected and qualified. This majority shall constitute the so-called
quorum under Section 53(a) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA
7160).

Section 446 of the Code enumerates the composition of the
sangguniang bayan to be as follows: (a) a municipal vice-mayor as the
presiding officer; (b) 8 regular sangguniang members; (c) the president of
the municipal chapter of the liga ng mga barangay; (d) the president of
the pambayang pederasyon ng mga sangguniang kabataan; and (e)
sectoral representatives as members thereof. The foregoing therefore
brings the total composition of the sangguniang bayan into thirteen (13)
members. Since the Congress has yet to enact a law providing for
sectoral representation at the local level and the Commission on Election
(COMELEC), on the other hand, has yet to promulgate rules and
regulations to effectively provide for the manner of election of such
sectoral representatives, there are yet no seats available for the 2 sectoral
representatives. The unavailability of an existing statute on sectoral
representation therefore in the meantime, makes the total composition of
the sangguniang bayan members into eleven (11) members only. A
quorum therefore is obtained if there should be at least six (6) members
present in a particular session.

In the case of Avelino vs. Cuenca (83 Phil. 17), the Supreme
excluded a member of the Senate in the determination of quorum in the
sessions of the Senate since the excluded Senator was in the United
States and, therefore, outside the coercive jurisdiction of the Senate. In
effect, this situation would effectively reduce, for the time being, the
quorum of the Senate.

Applying this case law in your situation, the 90-day preventive
suspension ordered against the Vice Mayor and five (5) other
sangguniang bayan members would bring the concerned officials outside
of the coercive jurisdiction of the sangguniang found in Section 53 (b) and
(c) of the Local Government Code since their preventive suspension
would constitute a legal restriction for them to discharge their powers,
duties and functions. We are of the view therefore that the remaining 5
members, namely: the SB member who was elevated to the position of
acting vice-mayor, 2 regular SB members, the president of the municipal
chapter of the Liga ng mga Barangay and the president of the
pambayang pederasyon ng mga sangguniang kabataan, shall be the
basis in determining your sangguniang's quorum.

This conclusion is arrived at since the preventive suspension of the 6
named officials had effectively reduced the number, for the time being,
in determining the quorum of that sangguniang bayan necessary for it to