REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

                             OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

                   ''                 -                  -        
                        16 October 2007

VICE MAYOR JULIUS CAESAR G. PLATON II
City Hall, Tanauan City

Dear Vice Mayor Platon:

This pertains to your letter posing some issues for clarification anent DILG Opinion No. 82, s. 2007.

It can be recalled that in reply to the issues as to whether or not the City Vice Mayor is included in the determination of a quorum and as to whether or not the City Vice Mayor is included in the determination of the two-thirds vote required in overriding the veto of the City Mayor, the Department, through DILG Opinion No. 82, s. 2007, ruled in the affirmative.

In relation thereto, you now posed the following rejoinders for clarification, which we herein quoted in toto, to wit:

1. "What could be the reason for the law stripping the city vice mayor who is also a member of the Sangguniang Panlungsod according to the said DILG opinion, of the power to vote when he is a member thereof despite the universally accepted dictum that a member has the inherent right, therefore automatic, to vote? How do you reconcile the obvious inconsistency or incongruency, i.e. being a member and at the same time prohibited from exercising the right to vote of a member?

2. The word 'membership' was freely substituted for or exchanged with the idea of 'composition'. Are these two terms intrinsically one and the same thing? Is there no basic distinction between the two? What is your concept of 'membership' and of 'composition'?

3. Apparently, the said DILG opinion was arrived at without the benefit of sufficient background information. We are specifically referring to the existence of the duly approved and adopted, operational Internal Rules of Procedure governing all proceedings of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of the City of Tanauan."

With respect to your Rejoinder No. 1, we have perused RA 9005 (Charter of Tanauan City) and we found no provision therein providing for certain limitations or prohibitions against the City Vice Mayor of Tanauan City when he is acting as Presiding Officer in the session of the Sangguniang Panlungsod. Instead, what we found are the pertinent provisions of the aforesaid Charter, stating that:

"Section 9. The City Vice Mayor.- (a) xxx (b) The city vice mayor shall exercise the following duties:

(1) Act as presiding officer of the sangguniang panlungsod and sign all warrants drawn on the city treasury for all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the sangguniang panlungsod;

xxx

(5) Perform such other duties and functions and exercise such other powers as provided for under Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 and those that are prescribed by law or ordinance."

On the other hand, Section 59 of RA 9005 provides:

"SEC. 59. Applicability of Laws.- The provisions of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and such laws as are applicable to component cities shall govern the City of Tanauan insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act."

Along this line, it is imperative to relate Section 59, as aforequoted, to Section 49, both of RA 7160, which we quote hereunder:

"SEC. 49. Presiding Officer.- (a) The vice governor shall be the presiding officer of the sangguniang panlalawigan, the city vice mayor, of the sangguniang panlungsod, the municipal vice mayor,