REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg., EDSA
corner Mapagkamaal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY
DILG OPINION NO. 20 S. 2009
April 29 2009

MS. MA. CORAZON G. MALALUAN
Chairman of the Board of Directors
Metro Kidapawan Water District
Lanao, Kidapawan City

Dear Chairman Malaluan:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking this
Department's legal opinion on whether the present
actuations of the elective city officials in Kidapawan City
are considered "interference" in the internal affairs of
the Water District, which are proscribed under
Presidential Decree No. 198 and other related
issuances of this Department.

Per your letter, your predicaments all started when
early last month, the Office of the City Mayor, Vice-
Mayor and the Sangguniang Panlungsod were in
receipt of letters from concerned concessionaires and
employees of Metro Kidapawan Water District (MKWD)
allegedly commenting and complaining on the present
management and financial status of the water
district. According to you, City Vice-Mayor Joseph A.
Evangelista thereafter wrote a letter addressed to your
General Manager Stella G. Anima informing the latter
of their receipt of the complaints and that they were
already referred to the Committee of the Whole for the
conduct of inquiry in aid of legislation. For your part,
the MKWD Board of Directors passed Board Resolution
No. 14 dated 08 February 2009 requesting Vice-
Mayor Evangelista to give ample time to you as well as
the MKWD Management to resolve the complaints, as
they are all internal affairs of the water district. Despite
this request, Vice-Mayor Evangelista still sent written
invitations to the Board of Directors, General Manager
and two (2) employees of the MKWD for your presence
during the "Question Hour" on 26 February 2009 and to
bring pertinent documents. At the same time, City
Mayor Rodolfo Y. Gantanggco wrote a letter dated 09
February 2009 to the MKWD Board of Directors asking
all members to submit their respective courtesy
resignation immediately. Hence, your query.

At the outset, please be informed that water districts,
such as the subject Metro Kidapawan Water District,
once formed are not under the jurisdiction of any
political subdivision. These agencies enjoy operational
autonomy, independent of local governments. In fact,
this Department is consistent in saying that they
should be allowed to operate without the least
hindrance and interference from the local officials but
with maximum support and assistance (Section 6,
Presidential Decree No. 198; DILG Memorandum
Circular No. 58-15 dated 01 March 1986; DILG
Memorandum Circular No. 97-78 dated 14 April 1997;
and DILG Memorandum Circular No. 2005-21 dated 04
March 2005).

We agree with you when you said that the only
participation of local government officials in the affairs of
the Water District under Sections 3 and 9 of
Presidential Decree No. 198 is when the local chief
executive concerned exercises his power to appoint
the members of the Board of Directors. This is the
basis of City Mayor Gantanggco why in the
abovementioned letter dated 09 February 2009, he
asked all the members of the Board of Directors to
submit their respective courtesy resignation
immediately because to his mind, being the appointing
authority thereof, he is responsible for whatever
irregularities that you might have committed while
discharging your duties as members of the Board of
Directors.

However, the case of Ortiz vs Commission on Election
(G.R. No. L-78957, June 28, 1998) provides that a
"COURTESY RESIGNATION" cannot properly be
interpreted as a resignation in the legal sense for it is not
necessarily a reflection of a public official's intention to
surrender his position. Rather, it manifests his
submission to the will of the political authority and the
appointing power.

Please note further that although Mayor Gantanggco
being the appointing authority of the Board of Directors
of MKWD, cannot compel the members of the board of
directors to immediately tender their resignation
without being accorded with their right to be heard in
their defense. Let it be stressed that compelling a
person to resign will give rise to possible coercion
charges which is punishable under the Revised Penal
Code.

With regard to the withdrawal/revocation of Mayor
Gantanggco of the appointment of Dr. Edwin Y.
Gantanggco as Board of Director of MKWD, please be
informed that an appointment to office, once and
completed, is not as a general rule, subject to
reconsideration or revocation. An appointment to
office is final and complete when the last act of the
appointing authority has been accomplished. At this
stage of completion, the appointment cannot be
reconsidered and revoked except where an officer is
removable at the will of the appointing power or there is
a defect in the appointing process and the appointing
authority was not aware of it. The moment the appointee
assumes the said position, he/she acquires a legal
and not merely equitable right, which is protected by
law and cannot be taken away from him/her, either by
revocation or by removal except for cause, and with
previous notice and hearing consistent with the
Constitutional requirements of due process. Thus,
Mayor Gantanggco cannot withdraw or revoke the
appointment of Dr. Edwin Y. Gantanggco as Board of
Director of MKWD without a valid ground for its
revocation and without observance of his right to due
process.

Anent your query as to whether or not the actuation of
the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Kidapawan was a
manifestation of interference in the internal affairs of
the water district, please be informed that the
Sangguniang Panlungsod has the authority to establish an
over sight or monitoring body to ensure that the programs
duly