Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

19 July 2007

MAYOR BENTHAM P. DELA CRUZ
Amian, Negros Oriental

Dear Sir:

This is in response to your earlier letter which sought this Department's legal opinion on whether or not a mayor-lawyer may represent himself in a civil case which is now pending with the Municipal Trial Court, Branch 1, Dumaguete City.

While it is expressly provided in Section 90 of the Local Government Code (RA 7160) that "xxx governor, city and municipal mayors are prohibit from practicing their profession or engaging in any occupation other than the exercise of their functions xxx", we are of the view, however, that this proscription applies only to regular practice of profession and should not include isolated ones. As such, this should not be construed as including a situation where the said local chief executive may be compelled to practice his profession (say, of being a lawyer) for having been personally sued, as what happened in the case at bar, as this is not regular but merely an isolated practice of profession. The rationale for this is the lawyer-practitioner who, at the same time, is the local chief executive, is not deemed practicing his profession nor engaging in any other occupation, but merely acted on an instinct of self-preservation in legally defending himself in a court of law.

Anent the issue on whether or not the mayor can represent his brother, Erwin dela Cruz, who is a co-defendant, the same must be answered in the affirmative. Defense of a co-defendant, especially in a case where both share a common defense, is still within the ambit of "isolated practice" which will justify legal representation.

We hope we have guided you accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
OIC-USLG

Legal:09/pau

copy furnished:
Director Rene K. Burdeos
DILG Regional Office No. 07
Cebu City