REPUBLI C OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

ATTY. EMMANUEL C. OPAY
Kahayagan, Bayog
Zamboanga del Sur

21 February 2007

Dear Atty. Opay:

This pertains to your letter seeking our intervention to nullify the designation and oath of office of Ms. Rosalie G. Simbajon as Punong Barangay of Conacon, Bayog, Zamboanga del Sur, for being illegal and contrary to law, and to recognize Mr. Diosdado T. Gumolon as the legitimate Punong Barangay of Conacon.

You stated that the Sangguniang Bayan of Conacon, Zamboanga del Sur, passed a Resolution on 10 August 2006 dismissing Punong Barangay Diosdado T. Gumolon in relation to an administrative case. On the firm belief that the said Resolution was without factual basis, as counsel of Mr. Gumolon, you filed a notice of appeal to the Sangguniang Panlawigan. Meantime, by virtue of the said Sangguniang Bayan Resolution, Mayor Mary Ann L. Caralla of that municipality administered the oath of office of Ms. Rosalie G. Simbajon as Punong Barangay of Conacon, vice Punong Barangay Gumolon..

Your instant request to nullify the designation and assumption of Ms. Rosalie G. Simbajon is predicated on your contention that the Sangguniang Bayan has no power to remove elective barangay officials and that, such power belongs only to the courts. You relied on Article 124 (b) of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code and the Decision of the Office of the President in the case "Arturo Hatulan, et al. vs. Capt. Nicanor Gilbuena", Barangay San Antonio, San Pedro, Laguna, docketed as OP Case No. 95-K-6322.

On the issue of whether or not the Sangguniang Bayan has the power to remove elective barangay officials pursuant to its power to hear and decide administrative cases against elective barangay officials under Sections 60 and 61 of the Local Government, the recent ruling of the Supreme Court in the case of "Publico vs. Villapando" (G.R. No. 147870, 31 July 2002) was emphatic in declaring that the power to remove elective local officials is exclusively vested in the proper courts only.

Hence, while we have no disagreement with your legal propositions, the Department, however, cannot accede to your instant request for lack of legal basis. The Department is not vested with appellate jurisdiction over Sangguniang Bayan decisions. Your instant request involves an action incidental to an appellate jurisdiction. The proper remedy, therefore, that should be resorted to is to file an appeal before the Sangguniang Panlawigan pursuant to Section 67 of the Local Government Code where it is provided that decisions of the Sangguniang Bayan are appealable to the Sangguniang Panlawigan. It is in your appeal to the Sangguniang Panlawigan that your herein advanced assignment of errors can be properly raised and resolved. Once your appeal is resolved in your favor, the resultant legal effect is the nullification of the designation of Ms. Simbajon. The nullification by this Department of the designation of Ms. Simbajon while your appeal is still pending before the Sangguniang Panlawigan is preemptive of the appellate jurisdiction of that body and, hence, contrary to law and public policy.

We hope to have guided you accordingly.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal:94/Merle
cc: The Regional Director
DILG Regional Office No. IX
Zamboanga City