Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapa
mahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

31 August 2007

ATTY. HERMI SUGINO ABAN
H. S. Aban Law Office
Suite II, Pioneer Bldg.
National Hi-way corner Libis, San Pedro
Puerto Princesa City

Dear Atty. Aban:

This has reference to your letter dated 17 August 2007 asking for our reconsideration/qualification of the legal opinion we previously rendered in DILG Opinion No. 64, series of 2007.

It may be recalled that in said DILG Opinion No. 64, series of 2007, dated 06 August 2007 addressed to Atty. Arecio R. Rendor, Jr., National President, Philippine Councilors League (PCL), the issue posed therein was "whether or not the City Councilors of cities recently declared as highly urbanized are still allowed to vote or be voted upon in the Provincial Federation Elections of the PCL or whether they should now have their own city chapter, electing their own officers, in accordance with the PCL Constitution and By Laws." In reply thereto, we opined that such City Councilors of cities recently declared as highly urbanized should have their own city chapter and elect their own members. We ratiocinated in the following manner:

"With respect to the organization of elective local officials, Section 508 (b) of the Local Government Code provides that: 'Sangguniang members of component cities and municipalities shall form a provincial federation and elect a board of directors and a set of officers headed by the president. The duly elected president of the provincial federation of sangguniang members of component cities and municipalities shall be an ex-officio member of the sangguniang panlalawigan concerned and shall serve as such only during his term of office as president of the provincial federations of sangguniang members of component cities and municipalities, which in no case shall be beyond the term of office of the sangguniang panlalawigan concerned.' 
From the foregoing express provisions of law and applying the legal maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius, which means that the mention of one thing implies the exclusion of the other, it is, therefore, clear that not having been mentioned by Section 508 (b) of the Local Government Code to be part of the Provincial Federation of the PCL, Sangguniang Members of highly urbanized cities are excluded in the membership of the Provincial Federation of Sangguniang Members. Such being the case, they cannot be allowed to vote or be voted upon in the Provincial Federation elections of the PCL. But consistent with your Constitution and By Laws which the PCL is likewise empowered to adopt per Section 509 of the Local Government Code, the Sangguniang Members of a highly urbanized city can form their own city chapter and elect their own officers in accordance with the PCL Constitution and By Laws."

In your letter, you now seek for reconsideration/qualification on our aforesaid legal opinion contending that we erroneously assumed that Puerto Princesa City is already a working "highly urbanized city" when in fact Puerto Princesa City is still in the process of conversion from component city to a highly urbanized city. You even enumerated the following instances to prove that as of the moment, Puerto Princesa City is still functioning as a component of the Province of Palawan:

1) As of the moment, Puerto Princesa City has only ten (10) City Councilors exclusive of the SK and ABC Chairmen when under the law, a highly urbanized city should have twelve (12) regular sangguniang members;

2) As of the moment, Puerto Princesa City still forwards its legislated Ordinances to the Provincial Government of Palawan for review when a highly urbanized city, under the law, is strictly independent of any Provincial Government; and

3) As of the moment, Puerto Princesa City has no representative in congress and still relies on the congressman of Southern Palawan for its representation in the Philippine Congress when, under the law, a highly urbanized City should have at least one (1) congressman of its own.

You further contended that the plebiscite conducted last 09 July 2007 did not automatically make Puerto Princesa City a highly urbanized city. You bolstered your contention by citing Article 12 (b)(3) of the Implementing Rules of Republic Act 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and you said that "a plebiscite is just part of the procedure for conversion but it did not in any way succinctly state that after the said plebiscite, the LGU affected will automatically function as a highly urbanized City and be classified as such. Even in Rule II of the same Implementing Rules on creation, conversion, division, merger, abolition, and alteration of LGUs, plebiscite is just part of the process but the start of the new corporate existence shall commence only upon the election and qualification of its new set of elective officials, unless some other time is fixed therefore by law creating it. (Rule II, Art. 6 to 11/IRR of RA 7160).'