Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A.Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapaghal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

10 July 2008

HON. CARMELA JOSEFA R. LAVIDES
Municipal Vice Mayor
Chairperson, Gumaca Tricycle Franchising Regulatory Board
Gumaca, Quezon.

Dear Vice Mayor Lavides:

Quoted hereunder is a query which was contained in your letter dated July 9, 2008
addressed to the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government to wit:

"The undersigned is respectfully requesting for a certification from
your good office whether or not Municipal Ordinance enacting for tricycle
fare increase is included in Executive Order 712 issued by Her Excellency
President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo."

We answer the above quoted query in the negative. The relevant portion of
Executive Order 712 provides viz:

"Section 2. Pending the review by the DOTC under Section 1 hereof
of existing orders, rules and regulations issued by LGUs, the Department
of Interior and Local Government (DILG) shall, subject to existing laws,
advice LGUs to suspend (1) the establishment and operations of new and
existing transport terminals that charge fees and require compulsory use
of public utility vehicles, (2) the enforcement of re-routing schemes that
violate the authorized routes as provided for in the PUV franchises, (3)
the issuance of new tricycle franchises while respecting those that have
been issued already, (4) the increase in local fees and charges applicable
to public transportation, and (5) the implementation of local programs,
projects and ordinances that have impact on the cost of operations of
public utility vehicles without first coordinating and getting the approval
of the DOTC to ensure that these programs, projects and ordinances do
not prejudice public interest by way of higher transport fares."

Ergo, under the cited Executive Order 712 and insofar as the tricycle sector is
concerned, what is expressly and strictly prohibited is the issuance of new tricycle
franchises thru an ordinance and not an ordinance providing for a tricycle fare increase.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary for Local Government

Legal/09/rb#17/paw