Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

05 October 2007

DIRECTOR QUIRINO M. LIBUNAO
DILG Regional Office No. 10
Masterson Ave., Km. 8, Upper Carmen
Cagayan de Oro City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your communication elevating to our level the issue
on whether or not a suspension from office of a Punong Barangay for 90
days can be considered as an interruption in the continuity of service for
one full term for purposes of computing the three-consecutive term limit.

As earlier shown, in answer to the query of Punong Barangay
Carmelito R. Damo of Barangay Indahag, Cagayan de Oro City, you wrote a
legal opinion on the same above-stated issue where you opined that: "The
way the law is worded, it is believed that the suspension from
office of a local elective official for any length of time interrupts

the continuity of service the full term for which the elective official
was elected".

You now seek confirmation of the said opinion from this level.

In reply thereto, may we quote pertinent portions of the Decision
rendered by the Supreme Court En Banc in the case of Benjamin U. Borja,
Jr. vs. COMELEC, et al. (G.R. No. 133495, 03 September 1998), as follows:

"To recapitulate, the term limit for elective local
officials must be taken to refer to the right to be elected
as well as the right to serve in the same elective
position. Consequently, it is not enough that an
individual has served three consecutive terms in an
elective local office, he must also have been elected to
the same position for the same number of times before
the disqualification can apply. This point can be made
clearer by considering the following cases or situations:

Case No. 1. Suppose A is a vice-mayor who
becomes mayor by reason of the death of the incumbent.
Six month before the next election, he resigns and is
twice elected thereafter. Can he run again for mayor in
the next elections?

Yes, because although he has already first served
as mayor by succession and subsequently resigned from
office before the full term expired, he has now actually
served three full terms in all for the purpose of
applying the term limit. Under Art. X, Section 8, 1987
Constitution, voluntary renunciation of the office is not
considered as an interruption in the continuity of his
service for the full term only if the term is one "for
which he was elected". Since A is only completing the
service of the term for which the deceased and not he
was elected, A cannot be considered to have completed
one term. His resignation constitutes an interruption of
the full term.

Case No. 2. Suppose B is elected mayor and,
during his first term, he is twice suspended for
misconduct for a total of 1 year. If he is twice reelected
after that, can he run for one more term in the next
election?

Yes, because he has served only two full terms
successively.

In both cases, the mayor is entitled to run for
reelection because the two conditions for the
application of the disqualification provisions have not
concurred, namely, that the local official concerned has
been elected three consecutive times and that he has
fully served three consecutive terms. In the first case,
even if the local official is considered to have served
three full terms notwithstanding his resignation before
the end of the first term, the fact remains that he has
not been elected three times. In the second case, the
local official has been elected three consecutive times,
but he has not fully served three consecutive terms."

Viewed from the aforestated pronouncement of the Supreme Court,
we concur with the regional opinion rendered by your level.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

Legal:43/La