Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

January 4, 2007

HON. WILMA DACIT BILLMAN
Municipal Mayor
Municipality of Castillejos
Province of Zambales

Dear Hon. Billman:

This refers to your letter-query relative to the leave of absence granted to SB Member Reynaido V. Misa who incidentally has a standing warrant issued by the Court.

As you represented, Vice-Mayor Enrique C. Clarin approved the application for leave of absence of SB Member Misa for his absences on following dates, to wit: October 14 to December 13, 2005 and January 1 to June 30, 2006. Incidentally, it appears that SB Member Misa was issued a warrant of arrest on September 14, 2005, he being one of the accused in People of the Philippines vs. Parungao, et al., Criminal Case No. 162-2005, now pending before MTC, Third Judicial Region. You now seek the opinion of this department on the following issues:

1. Is the vice-Mayor accountable for his acts by granting/approving the leaves applied for by Member Misa?

2. Considering that, Member Misa, could no longer performs (sic) his mandate due to the circumstances abovecited to include dereliction of duty, can he be legally replaced now at this point in time?

Anent the first issue, we are of the opinion that Vice Mayor Clarin cannot be held liable for granting the application for leave of absence of SB Member Misa. In the absence of evidence that he granted the said application of leave in order to allow SB Member Misa to go into hiding and evade arrest, we are constrained to give the Vice Mayor the benefit of the doubt by stating that he did so regularly and in good faith. Please be informed that our legal jurisprudence presumes good faith and regularity of performance of official function of public officials.

Anent the second issue, dereliction of duty or any other act that may sanction disciplinary action against a public official is a factual issue so that evidence showing the same is necessary. It cannot be presumed especially because the absence of SB Member Misa was with prior leave.

Please be informed that administrative sanctions against elective local officials are prescribed under Section 60 of the Local Government Code and, to some extent, by the adopted Internal Rules of Procedure of every sanggunian.

Moreover, the imposition of these administrative sanctions can be brought about by filing an administrative complaint against the erring sanggunian member before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan pursuant to Section 61 of the Local Government Code or by subjecting the erring sanggunian member to the internal disciplinary actions of the Sangguniang pursuant to Section 50 of the same Code.

Moreover, replacement of a sanggunian member is allowed only if there is a permanent vacancy in the sanggunian. In your instant query, there being no permanent vacancy obtaining in the position of SB member Misa as he is on official leave or that there is no court order removing him from office per the SC ruling in the case of Pablito vs. Vilpando, G.R. No. 151914, July 31, 2002, the matter of his replacement is legally not feasible.

At any rate, should you have evidence which you believe could overturn the presumptions, we advise you to initiate the appropriate action before the proper forum.

We hope we have enlightened you on this matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

cc: DIR. JOSEFINA CASTILLA-GO
DILG, Region III
Barangay Maimpis, San Fernando
Pampanga
Legal:28/Merle