REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Cudominimum II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

04 January 2006

HON. VINCENT "Bingbong" P. CRISOLOGO
Representative, 1st District, Quezon City
House of Representatives
Batasan Complex, Constitution Hills
Diliman, Quezon City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your verbal query as to whether or not a Punong Barangay has disciplinary authority over barangay appointive officials, such as barangay secretaries and treasurers.

In reply thereto, may it be noted that per Section 389 of the Local Government Code, the Punong Barangay is the Local Chief Executive of the barangay government. Corollary thereto, Section 87 of the same Code provides that in a local government unit, except as otherwise provided by law, the Local Chief Executive is the disciplinary authority over subordinate officials and employees under his jurisdiction. Section 84 of the same Code further provides that investigation and adjudication of administrative complaints against appointive local officials and employees as well as their suspension and removal shall be in accordance with the Civil Service law and rules and other pertinent laws. The results of such administrative investigation shall be reported to the Civil Service Commission.

Along this line, the Civil Service Commission came up with Resolution No. 99-1-936 dated 31 August 1999, providing for the Uniform Rules on Administrative Cases.

Clearly from the foregoing, the disciplinary authority over barangay appointive officials, including barangay secretaries and treasurers, is the Punong Barangay being the Local Chief Executive of that unit. However, based on the Uniform Rules on Administrative Cases issued by the Civil Service Commission, to initiate a complaint, there must first be a complaint under oath against the concerned barangay appointive official to be filed before the Punong Barangay, whereupon the Punong Barangay shall give the complained barangay appointive official the opportunity to answer the complaint, likewise under oath. A hearing shall then be conducted where the complainant and the respondent are given the opportunity to meet face to face and confront witnesses for or against them. This is part of the observance of due process, a right guaranteed by the Constitution to every person. The decision of the Punong Barangay, after the hearing shall have been conducted, is appealable to the Civil Service Commission. The remedy of a person aggrieved by the Punong Barangay's decision is to file an appeal before the Civil Service Commission for the latter to possibly correct what is supposed to be an "erroneous judgment" as to the aggrieved party (appellant).

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGELO T. REYES
Secretary

cc: Director Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG - National Capital Region
LMP Building, Ermin Garcia St.
Cubao, Quezon City

Legal:43/La