REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahahi St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

16 October 2007

MS. CARMELA C. VERGARA
Municipal Local Government Operations Officer
DILG Municipal Field Office
Santa Maria, Ilocos Sur

Dear Ms. Vergara:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion regarding the
proper interpretation of the three-consecutive term limit rule.

In your letter, you represented the following facts:

• The incumbent Punong Barangay of Pacang, Santa Maria,
  Ilocos Sur, ran as Punong Barangay in the 1994 Barangay
  Elections and won;

• In the 1997 Barangay elections, he ran again for the same
  position and again won;

• In the 1998 National and Local elections, he filed his
  certificate of candidacy as Sangguniang Bayan Member but
  unfortunately, he lost;

• In the 2002 Barangay elections, he ran again and won.

Hence, you now pose this query: Is the said elective barangay
official still eligible to run as Punong Barangay in the forthcoming 2007
Synchronized Barangay and SK Elections?

Before dealing squarely with your query, we deem it proper to give
some discussions on the pertinent provisions of law applicable in the
case at hand.

"SEC. 43. Term of Office.- (a) The term of office
of all local elective officials elected after the effectivity
of this Code shall be three (3) years, starting from noon
of June 20, 1992 or such date as may be provided for by
law; except that of elective barangay officials:
Provided, That all local officials first elected during the
local elections immediately following the ratification of
the 1987 Constitution shall serve until noon of June 30,
1992.

(b) No local elective official shall serve for more
than three (3) consecutive terms in the same position.
Voluntary renunciation of the office for any length of
time shall not be considered as an interruption in the
continuity of service for the full term for which the
elective official concerned was elected. xxx (Emphasis
supplied)

(c) The term of office of barangay officials and
members of the sangguniang kabataan shall be for
three (3) years, which shall begin after the regular
election of barangay officials on the second Monday of
1994."

The foregoing provision is the basis for the so-called three-consecutive
term limit rule among local elective officials, which disqualifies them from
running for the same position after serving the same terms.

In the leading case of Borja vs. COMELEC (G.R. No. 133495, 03
September 1998) and in several cases decided thereafter up to the present,
the Supreme Court consistently ruled that for Section 43 (b) to apply, two
(2) elements must concur, which are: (1) the local official concerned must
have been elected to that office; and (2) said elective local official must
have fully served the term of same office for three consecutive terms. If these
circumstances are present, then the concerned local official is already
disqualified to run for the same position on his supposed fourth consecutive
term.

At this juncture, it is not amiss to point out that the aforequoted
Section 43 of the Local Government Code did not expressly mandate that
elective barangay officials are covered by the three-term limit rule. However,
the issue as to whether or not elective barangay officials are covered by the