Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

16 May 2006

MR. DICZON L. BUQUE
Barangay Lupon
c/o Bistoy Santiago
T. Santiago Street, Canumay
Valenzuela City

Dear Mr. Buque:

This refers to your letter seeking clarification on the action taken by
the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Valenzuela City regarding your petition to
divide Barangay Canumay located in that city.

Specifically, you would like to be clarified on the pronouncement
made by the Committee on Rules and Laws of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
of Valenzuela City that the division of Barangay Canumay, Valenzuela City,
which is located in Metro Manila, can only be done by the Congress of the
Philippines through the enactment of an appropriate law.

In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to Sections 385 and
386 of the Local Government Code, which we hereunder quote:

"SEC. 385. Manner of Creation.- A barangay may be
created, divided, merged, abolished, or its boundary substantially
altered, by law or by an ordinance of the sangguniang
panlalawigan or sangguniang panlungsod, subject to approval by

a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite to be conducted by the
COMELEC in the local government unit or units directly affected
within such period of time as may be determined by the law or
ordinance creating said barangay. In the case of the creation of
barangays by the sangguniang panlalawigan, the recommendation
of the sangguniang bayan concerned shall be necessary."

"SEC. 386. Requisites for Creation.- (a) A barangay may be
created out of a contiguous territory which has a population of at
least two thousand (2,000) inhabitants as certified by the National
Statistics Office except in cities and municipalities within Metro
Manila and other metropolitan political subdivisions or in highly
urbanized cities where such territory shall have a certified
population of at least five thousand (5,000) inhabitants: Provided,
That the creation thereof shall not reduce the population of the
original barangay or barangays to less than the minimum
requirement prescribed herein.

To enhance the delivery of basic services in the indigenous
cultural minorities, barangays may be created in such communities
by an Act of Congress, notwithstanding the above requirement.

Clearly from Section 385, a barangay can be divided either by law
passed by Congress or by an ordinance passed by the Sangguniang
Panlungsod in case of a division of a barangay located in a city. Section
386, on the other hand, speaks of the requisites for creating a barangay. It
is worthy to note that unlike municipalities, cities and provinces, where the
requirements of creation speak of minimum population, land area and
income, with respect to the barangays, however, with regard to the minimum population in creating barangays is, there
should have been at least 2,000 inhabitants as certified by the National
Statistics Office. However, highly urbanized cities, the
requirement of the minimum population is at least 5,000 inhabitants. It is
noted, however, that the law provided that the creation of a barangay shall
not reduce the population of the original barangay to less than the minimum
requirement prescribed by law and that is, 2,000 or 5,000
inhabitants, as the case may be.

With respect to indigenous cultural minorities, barangays may be
created in such community by Congress, through the enactment of a law
notwithstanding the non-compliance of the above requirements.

Going now to your query, it is thus clear that the Committee on Rules
and Laws erred in its conclusion that only Congress can divide a barangay
in Metro Manila. It may not be amiss to point out that the division can be
done either by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, through the enactment
of an appropriate law, or by Congress, through the enactment of an appropriate law,
whether or not the barangay to be divided is located within Metro Manila.
In the case, however, of the Sangguniang Panlungsod creating or dividing a
barangay, the Sangguniang is bound to observe
the minimum requirement of creating a barangay as set forth under
Section 386 of the Local Government Code.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal:43/La

cc: Director Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG - National Capital Region
LMP Building, Ermin Garcia St.
Cubao, Quezon City