Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

12 March 2008

MR. ROLANDO B. JARABELO
Punong Barangay
Barangay Milagrosa, Quezon City

Dear PB Jarabelo:

This has reference to your earlier letter requesting our legal opinion on the following aforequoted queries, viz:

"1) What exactly was the extent of the power of review vested on the QCC under Sec. 333 of R.A. 7160? 

2) Considering that the QCC deferred action on Ordinance No. 02-S-2007 and considering further that QCC will adjourn on March 19, 2007, what is the legal implication of its adjournment with respect to the review of our budget for CY2007 which it failed to take action on?

3) Is there any legal merit at all on any objection raised by any member of the Sanggunian after a majority of the Sanggunian approved and enacted an ordinance and transmitted the same for review to the QCC?

4) Is a unanimous vote of the Sanggunian membership required by law to validly enact an ordinance?"

Per your letter, your Sanggunian Barangay has previously approved Ordinance No. 01-S-2007 enacting the annual budget for CY 2007. In accordance with established rules, said Ordinance was forwarded to the Sanggunian Panlungsod, that City, for review through the City Budget Officer. Thereafter, the Sanggunian Panlungsod referred back said Ordinance to the Sanggunian Barangay so that the latter body would allegedly resolve some objections thereto made by four (4) members thereof who, surprisingly, were also signatories to the subject Ordinance.
Acting on the referral of the Sanggunian Panlungsod, the Sanggunian Barangay, by a majority vote of five (5) to four (4) members, decided not to amend the subject Ordinance. Thus, the subject Ordinance was transmitted again to the Sanggunian Panlungsod for the latter's reconsideration. During the proceeding of the Sanggunian Panlungsod, the Presiding Officer ruled to defer action on the subject Ordinance. Hence, your queries.

Since your queries are interrelated, we shall answer them jointly.
At the outset, may we invite your attention to Sections 54 © and 333 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) which provide and we quote:

"SECTION 54. Approval of Ordinances.--xxx xxx
© Ordinances enacted by the sangguniang barangay shall, upon approval by the majority of all its members, be signed by the punong barangay. (Emphasis Supplied)

SECTION 333. Review of the Barangay Budget-- (a) Within ten (10) days from its approval, copies of the barangay ordinance authorizing the annual appropriations shall be furnished the sangguniang panlungsod or the sangguniang bayan, as the case may be, through the city or municipal budget officer. The sangguniang concerned shall have the power to review such ordinance in order to ensure that the provisions of this Title are complied with. If within sixty (60) days after the receipt of the ordinance, the sangguniang concerned takes no action thereon, the same shall continue to be in full force and effect. If within the same period, the sangguniang concerned shall have ascertained that the ordinance contains appropriations in excess of the estimates of the income duly certified as collectible, or that the same has not complied with the budgetary requirements set forth in this Title, the said ordinance shall be declared inoperative in its entirety or in part. Items of appropriations contrary to, or in excess of the general limitations or the maximum amount prescribed in this Title shall be disallowed or reduced accordingly.

(b) Within the period hereinabove fixed, the sangguniang panlungsod or sangguniang bayan concerned shall return the barangay ordinance, through the city or municipal budget officer, to the punong barangay with the advice of the action thereon for proper adjustments, in which event the barangay shall operate on the ordinance authorizing annual appropriations of the preceding fiscal year until such time that the new ordinance authorizing annual appropriations shall have met the objections raised. Upon receipt of such advice, the barangay treasurer or the city or municipal treasurer who has custody of the funds shall not make further disbursement from any item of appropriation declared inoperative, disallowed, or reduced."