REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND) LOCAL|IGOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium 1, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,

Diliman, Quezon Ci

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

05 February 2008

MAYOR SONIA TORRES AQUINO
Tanauan City

Dear Mayor Aquino:

This pertains to your letter requesting for legal opinion relative to City
Ordinance No. 07-8 enacted on 26 November 2007 by the Sangguniang
Panlungsod of Tanauan City, entitled: “An rdinance Requiring All Owners
of Lands or Buildings, All Persons Possessin Interests Therein, Contractors,
or Developers to Secure the Concurrence of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
Prior ‘to Introducing Any Commercial or Industrial Construction or
Renovation”, which you vetoed as evidenced |by your attached Veto Message
for being ultra vires and/or prejudicial to public interest.

|

As could be qleaned from the proposed Ordinance No. 07-8, it
appears that said Ordinance requires the c ncurrence of the Sangguniang
Panlungsod as a prerequisite for the intro uction of any construction or
renovation on any land or building within the territorial jurisdiction of the
City for commercial or industrial purposes. | required the City Engineer and
the Building Official to submit to the Sangqunian the list of applicants for
building permit. Said Ordinance further made it a duty on all property
owners/persons possessing interest over the! land or building concerned or
contractors and developers concemed to secure the prior concurrence of
the Sangguniang Panlungsod before introducing any construction or

renovation thereon. |

In reply to your query, please be informed that we fully concur with
your contentions on the legal infirmities of the proposed Ordinance as

contained in your Veto Message sent to the angguniang Panlungsod on 17
December 2007.

SLG GPG wp 02 Zo s

~2- |
|

Moreover, it is not amiss to point out t the issuance, non-issuance,

revocation, cancellation or suspension of building permits is governed by

the pertinent provisions of the National Building Code. Under the said

National Building Code, it is the City Building Official who exercises the

discretion whether or not to issue the building permit, after determining if

the technical requirements under said Code were duly complied with by the
applicant. It is even worth emphasizing that the decision of the City Building

Official, with respect to issuance of building permits, is appealable not to
the City Mayor but to the Secretary of Public) Wor | and Highways per the

pertinent provisions of the National Building Code.

Along this line, we fully concur with your citation in your Veto Message
of the case of Villacorta vs. Bemardo (143 SCRA 480), where the Supreme
Court invalidated a city ordinance for being ultra vires and not consistent
with national laws when it required the submission of subdivision plans to
the City Engineer before the same is submitted for approval to and
verification by the General Land Registration Office or by the Director of
Lands when Act No. 496, which is a national law, did not require such
submission. The Ordinance, therefore, effectively amended a general law,
which js Act No. 496. In effect, the Supreme Court enunciated the principle
that an ordinance cannot provide addition requirements on top of the
requirements already required under a national law, as it shall impede the
exercise of rights granted in a general law and/or make a general law
subordinated to a local ordinance.

Under the Local Government Code, particul rly Section 48 thereof,

Congress, vested by the Constitution with th power to legislate, delegated
to the different Sanggunians below the power to legislate their own local
ordinances. Hence, since the Sanggunians are simply exercising delegated
legislative powers, it can never rise above Congress who is the owner of the
power to legislate. Stated differently, ordinances by the Sanggunians must
always be consistent with national laws an cannot run counter thereto
being merely subordinated power of legislation. In the case of Magtajas vs.
Pryce Properties, Inc. (G.R. No. 111097, 20 July 1994), the Supreme Court

|
ruled that an ordinance must not be contr to the Constitution and the
national laws.

We even observed that the proposed Ordinance may be challenged
on the ground that it is against public policy. In the case of Tatel vs.

Municipality of Virac, Catanduanes (207 SCRA 157) and in Solicitor General

3B.

vs. MMDA (204 SCRA 837), the Supreme Cou
to be valid, the same, among others, must be ¢

In this regard, it is wise to examine the
entitled: “An Act to Improve Efficiency in
Service to the Public by Reducing Bureaucrat
and Corruption, and Providing Penalties Th
provides for the declared policy of the State, ta

“SEC. 2. Declaration of P
declared the policy of the State 1
accountability, proper manageme
and public property as well as t
practices aimed at the preven
corruption in government. Toward
shall maintain honesty and resp
public officials and employees
appropriate measures to promote t

agency with regard to the manner

‘the public, which shall encompas
adoption of simplified procedures
tape and expedite transactions in g

In this regard, the proposed Ordinance,
Mayor, may run counter to the declared policy

We hope to have enlightened you on the

Legal:43/La
cc: Director Roberto C. Abejero
DILG Regional Office No. IV-A
FTI Complex, Taguig City

rt rulec
consist

recent
the D
ic Red

> Wit:

olicy.-
fo pro
nt of
io este
tion

s this
onsibi

13
transp:

> matte;

1erefory.

and

1 that for an ordinance
ent with public policy.

law, which is RA 9485,
elivery of Government
Tape, Preventing Graft
Section 2 thereof

It is hereby
mote integrity,
public affairs
tblish effective
of graft and
end, the State
lity among its
shall take
larency in each

of transacting with
‘S a program for the
that will reduce red
yovernment.”

which, was vetoed by the City
of the State as aforestated.

Very truly yours,

(ride —

USTERE A. PANADERO

Undersecretary.

