REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

04 July 2006

VICE GOVERNOR RAMIL L. GENTUGAYA
Provincial Capitol Building
Nabunturan, Compostela Valley

Dear Vice Governor Gentugaya:

This refers to your letter requesting for legal opinion on "what are those
resolutions adopted by the Sanggunian that need or need not be
signed or approved by the Governor".

You said that it is the practice of the Sanggunian Panlalawigan to submit to
the Governor resolutions confirming Municipal Appropriations Ordinances after its
review thereon and so with other resolutions.

In reply thereto, please be informed that only resolutions involving the
adoption of local development plans and public investment programs originally
enacted by the Sanggunian Panlalawigan are to be submitted to the Provincial
Governor for his approval or disapproval (Sec. 55 [b] and [c], RA 7160,
otherwise known as "The Local Government Code of 1991"). Perforce,
resolutions other than those mentioned above, need not be submitted to the
Governor for approval.

Parenthetically, those actions of the Sanggunian Panlalawigan in the exercise
of its review power per Section 56 of RA 7160, over ordinances or resolutions
involving local development plans and public investment programs enacted by
Sanggunians of component cities and municipalities, no longer require the approval
of the Governor because his power to approve or disapprove legislative measures
pertains only to those that were enacted by the Sanggunian Panlalawigan in the
exercise of its ordinance-making power and not to those measures passed by the
same Sanggunian in the exercise of its review power (Secs. 54 and 55, RA 7160).
The power to review municipal legislative actions, such as the municipal
appropriations ordinance, is lodged solely to the Sanggunian Panlalawigan whose
action on the review is expressed by way of a resolution.

Such being the case, we are of the view that your practice of submitting to
the Provincial Governor those Sanggunian Panlalawigan resolutions "confirming"
Municipal Appropriations Ordinances is considered a mere surplusage as the same is
not required by the Local Government Code.

We hope that we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal:72/md
cc: The Regional Director
DILG Region XI
Davao City