REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg., EDSA
corner M arq uinhal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

MS. LILIA SERRANO
Punong Barangay
Barangay San Martin De Porres
57 Banahaw Street,
Cubao
Quezon City

Dear Ms. Serrano:

This refers to your earlier letter requesting our legal opinion on whether Kagawad Ariel Floralde Balmaceda, an elected member of your Sangguniang Barangay whose name was ordered excluded from the Voter's List and whose Voter's Registration Record was directed to be removed from the corresponding Book of Voters of San Martin De Porres, 4th District, Quezon City, by the Regional Trial Court, Branch 217 of Quezon City, can still hold his office as kagawad and at the same time receive his honorarium.

In reply to your query, please be apprised that while it is expressly and mandatorily required as an indispensable and continuing qualification under Section 39 of the Local Government Code of 1991 that an elective barangay official must be a registered voter in the barangay where he intends to be elected, may we stress, however, that Mr. Balmaceda's exclusion from the Voter's List and removal from the Book of Voters of Barangay San Martin De Porres pursuant to the Regional Trial Court's decision does not ipso facto operate to automatically remove him from office, the said decision being merely pertaining to Mr. Balmaceda's qualification only.

Nevertheless, the RTC decision may now be used as a basis for Mr. Balmaceda's consequent removal from office in another proceeding. Proper court action may now be commenced by any person to remove him from his elective office on the very same ground that he is no longer a registered voter of Barangay San Martin De Porres, a qualification which he ought to continuously possess while in office.



In view of the foregoing, it is our considered opinion that Kagawad Ariel Floralde Balmaceda can still hold his office as kagawad and receive his honorarium for his attendance during the sangguniang sessions until he is consequently removed from office by the court in a proper proceeding.

Hope that we have enlightened you on your query.

Very truly yours,

ANGELIT. REYES
Secretary
cc.: DIRECTOR SERAFIN M. BENALDO
DILG - NCR
Ground Floor, LMP Building
Ermin Garcia Street
Cubao, Quezon City

The DILG is the primar catalyst for excellence in local governance that nurtures self-reliant, progressive, orderly, safe and globally-competitive communities sustained by God-centered and empowered citizenry