Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
DILG OPINION NO. 57 S. 2005
29 November 2005

MAYOR PEPITO P. LO
Mercedes, Camarines Norte

Dear Mayor Lo:

This pertains to your earlier letter seeking our legal opinion on the
"legality and justification of creating Mercedes Support Development and
Services Center (MSDSC) in Manila".

As can be deduced from your draft ordinance, the proposed
creation of MSDSC is conceptualized as conduit for the coordination and
fast tracking of nationally funded projects that the Municipality of
Mercedes may avail of. Its operation will be carried out with one but
varied work force in terms of duties and responsibilities in areas of
infrastructure, trade and industry, education, health and sanitation,
livelihood, tourism and employment, peace and order, sports
development, and disaster preparedness. This work force will be
comprised of contractual development officers based in Manila.

As can be inferred from said concept, no positions will be created
considering that the work to be performed is to be carried out through
professional services that will be on contractual basis. Clearly, what is to
be established is not some sort of a concept of an office but rather a
mere facility. A facility is something built or installed to perform some
particular function. It means something that promotes the ease of any
action or course of conduct (Black’s Law Dictionary).

Along that point, the establishment of the proposed MSDSC finds
basis under Section 17 (a) and (b) of the Local Government Code which
mandate local government units to exercise such other powers and
discharge such other functions and responsibilities as are necessary,
appropriate, or incidental to efficient and effective provisions of the basic
services and facilities. It has to be noted that the basic services and
facilities contemplates not only those enumerated in the aforesaid
section.

Moreover, the proposed MSDSC is justifiable under the broad aegis
of Section 16, RA 7160, which provides:

"SEC. 16. General Welfare.- Every local government unit shall
exercise the powers expressly granted, those necessarily implied therefrom,
as well as powers necessary, appropriate, or incidental for its efficient and
effective governance, and those which are essential to the promotion of the
general welfare. xxx"

Hence, the Municipality of Mercedes can legally transact official
business through MSDSC facility by virtue of its conferred powers
pursuant to the aforestated provisions of the Local Government Code. It
is to be understood that the funds will be used for the operation of said
action center shall be sourced from the coffers of that municipality, and
subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGELO T. REYES
Secretary

cc: The Regional Director
DILG Region V
Legazpi City
Legal: 09:68/Merle