Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

July 12, 2007

MR. MARVIN M. ARBOLEDA
Provincial Political Officer
KGMA Foundation, Inc.
Romblon Chapter
Romblon, Romblon

Dear Mr. Arboleda:

This is a rejoinder to your letter dated 24 May 2007 wherein you inquired what are the allowable expenditures and appropriations for the Office of Senior Citizen Affairs (OSCA for brevity) pursuant to Section 13 of RA 9257.

Section 13 of RA 9257 provides:

"SEC. 13. Appropriations. - The necessary appropriation for the operation and maintenance of the OSCA shall be appropriated and approved by the local government units concerned. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act upon its effectivity shall be charged out of the funds of the Office of the President. Thereafter, any such sum as shall be needed for the regular implementation of this Act shall be included in subsequent General Appropriations Act following its enactment into law."

The first sentence of the cited provision answers the question as to what entity shall provide for the maintenance and operating expenses of the OSCA. Per COA Circular 2003-01 dated June 17, 2003 maintenance and operating expenses include but are not limited to the following items: Traveling, supplies and materials, utility, communication, professional services, etc. Hence, applying the said COA circular, expenses for traveling, supplies and materials, utility, communication, professional services, etc. shall be the responsibility of LGU. Note however, that salaries and wages are not included as expenditures falling under MOOE per the above cited COA Circular as they belong to other categories of expenses otherwise known as Personal Services.

However, this level is of the view that expenses for salaries and wages may still be given to the head and personnel of the OSCA thru an ordinance crafted by the LGU for that purpose in as much as RA 9257 is silent on this issue. Stated otherwise, since an ordinance for that purpose is not prohibited under said law, permissibility of such an ordinance is preferred otherwise we will have an instance where a law expressly allows Maintenance and Operating Expenses while disallowing expenses for Personal Services. This is absurd interpretation and should be avoided.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

PASCUAL V. VERON CRUZ, JR.
Head Executive Assistant

cc: DIR. ROLANDO I. RAFAEL
DILG Region IV-B
3rd Floor, Santos & Sons Bldg.
973 Aurora cor. Dapdap Street
Quezon City
Legal:09/Merle