Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

28 January 2008

MAYOR CARMINA G. BASCON
Himamaylan City, Negros Occidental

Dear Mayor Bascon:

This has reference to your earlier letter requesting our legal opinion on whether a duly approved City Development Council (CDC) Resolution could still be modified or reversed for it to be included in the 2008 Appropriations Ordinance.

In your letter, you represented that the Sangguniang Panlungsod (SP), that City, has not yet passed the 2008 Appropriations Ordinance, which among others, include the twenty percent (20%) Development Fund for projects duly approved by the CDC last September 2007. Instead, said SP returned the CDC Resolution and asked the CDC to modify or revise or alter, the priority projects and programs already approved by it for reasons, that: (1) a Barangay Development Council's (BDC) resolution is required in order to validate the priority programs approved by the CDC; and (2) the new sets of barangay officials, may have priority projects or programs different from those of the former sets of barangay officials, and may not have been included in the duly approved CDC Resolution for priority projects. Hence, your query.

In reply to your query, may we invite your attention to the following provisions of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), to wit:

"SECTION 109. Functions of Local Development Councils.—(a) The provincial, city, and municipal development councils shall exercise the following functions:

(1) Formulate long-term, medium-term, and annual socioeconomic development plans and policies;

(2) Formulate the medium-term and annual public investment programs;

(3) Appraise and prioritize socio-economic development programs and projects;

(4) Formulate local investment incentives to promote the inflow and direction of private investment capital;

(5) Coordinate, monitor, and evaluate the implementation of development programs and projects; and

(6) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law or component authority."

SECTION 114. Relation of Local Development Councils to the Sangguniang and the Regional Development Council.—(a) The policies, programs, and projects proposed by local development councils shall be submitted to the sangguniang concerned for appropriate action. xxx"

Based on the foregoing, the primary function of the Local Development Council (LDC) is the formulation and initiation of the comprehensive multisectoral development plan and public investment program of a province, city or municipality. Such comprehensive multi-sectoral development plan shall thereafter have to be submitted to the sangguniang concerned for its appropriate action and approval. However, such submission and approval are only for purposes of the enactment by their concerned sangguniang of the corresponding ordinance providing for legislative authorization of the budget for said projects, consistent with the fundamental principle that no money shall be paid out of the local treasury except in pursuance of an appropriation ordinance (Sec. 305 (a), RA 7160).

In this Department's previous opinions, we have consistently opined that the sangguniang's approval does not include the authority to revise the projects identified and formulated by the local development council since this would render nugatory the purposes and objectives for which local development councils had been institutionalized by the Code. If at all the sangguniang is amenable to the LDC's approved projects and programs, the said sangguniang should instead return it to the LDC with its comments and recommendations and for the LDC's proper consideration. Hence, although the sangguniang is authorized by the Code to approve such policies, programs and projects formulated by the local development council, it cannot, however, modify, revise or alter the same.

In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the view that the act of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Himamaylan City in returning the CDC Resolution is proper in order for the CDC to re-deliberate and consider the comments and recommendations of the Sangguniang Panlungsod. It must be emphasized however that notwithstanding the comments and recommendation of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Himamaylan, it is the LDC that will ultimately decide whether or not to consider the same in their formulation of the comprehensive multi-sectoral development plan and public investment program.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

By authority of the Secretary:

PASCUA, VERON CRUZ, JR.
Head Executive Assistant