Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magapagal St.
Dillman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

16 February 2007

MS. JESSICA B. ENDANGAN
a.k.a. STARGAZER
TV/Media Personality

Dear Ms. Endangan:

This pertains to your letter seeking enlightenment as to the procedure in securing permits and licenses for the operation of chemical plants and oil depots.

You pointed out that manufacturing and highly pollutive industries and those carrying hazardous toxic materials/chemicals should not be allowed in a light industrial area. You further pointed out whether there is conflict of interest when a barangay kagawad allows a diesel company to rent in his property. Likewise, you noted that in allowing such industries to operate in the area, the barangay failed to conduct consultation with the people and hear their complaints. When asked, the barangay kagawad, however, declared that it was the city government which allowed these industries to operate. Hence, your query.

In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to Section 20 of the Local Government Code which empowers only the city or municipality, through an ordinance passed by the sanggunian after conduct of public hearing, to reclassify the lands within their territories as industrial, residential, commercial or industrial purposes. The ordinance providing for this land classification is commonly called the "zoning ordinance" or the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the city or municipality, as the case may be. May we note in this regard that the Local Government Code did not further classify industrial lands to be either for light or heavy industry. This silence of the Local Government Code can, however, be supplemented if the ordinance itself would provide for the sub-classification of industrial lands to be either for light or heavy industries if the city or municipal should so desire.

Corollarily, chemical plants and oil depots are undoubtedly environmentally critical plants. Under the law, before an environmentally critical project is operated, an Environmental Clearance Certificate (ECC) is required to be secured first from the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). One of the requirements for securing an ECC is the Sangguniang Bayan Resolution and Sangguniang Barangay Resolution expressing that the proposed environmentally critical project is socially accepted in the area. This is the so-called social acceptability requirement. If these requirements are already procured and such other requirements are likewise complied with, the DENR will now issue the ECC but the fact of such issuance will not automatically authorize a person or corporation to already engage in the project. The mayor's permit has still to be secured from the city or municipality concerned for the purpose of compliance with regulatory measures and payment of corresponding fees as may be required by the city or municipality through an ordinance.

Along this line, under Section 152 of the Local Government Code, it is provided that no city or municipality may issue any license or permit for any business or activity unless a clearance is first obtained from the barangay where such business or activity is located or conducted. This is commonly called the barangay clearance. The application for barangay clearance shall be acted upon within 7 working days from the filing thereof and in the event that the clearance is not issued within the said period, the city or municipality may issue the corresponding mayor's permit or license.

With respect to your query as to whether or not there is conflict of interest if a barangay kagawad would allow a diesel company to rent his property, may we bring your attention to the definition of conflict of interest. Under RA 6713, otherwise known as the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees, Section 3 (i) thereof provides that conflict of interest arises when a public official or employee is a member of a board, an officer, or a substantial stockholder of a private corporation or owner or has a substantial interest in a business, and the interest of such corporation or business, or his rights or duties therein, may be opposed to or affected by the faithful performance of official duty.

Considering, therefore, that the barangay kagawad simply exercised his civil right pertaining to acts of ownership over the land of which he is the owner, we are of the view that there is no conflict of interest. Moreover, a barangay clearance is issued by the Punong Barangay and not by the Barangay Kagawad, hence, the latter has no participation in the issuance of the same.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

RONALD L. PUNO
Secretary

Legal:43/La