REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapag mahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG OPINION NO. 36, S. 2007
20 April 2007

MAYOR ALBERTO B. ACAIN
Libertad, Misamis Oriental

Dear Mayor Acain:

This pertains to your request for legal opinion regarding certain
matters affecting the discharge by the Members of the Sangguniang Bayan
thereto of their legislative functions.

You represented that the Sangguniang Bayan has failed to conduct
their regular sessions for 4 consecutive weeks from 12 March 2007 to 02
April 2007, their regular session being every Monday of the week at 9:00
o'clock in the morning, yet they continue to receive their salaries and other
monetary benefits in full. That because of their inability to conduct regular
sessions for 4 consecutive weeks, the Sangguniang failed to act on your
request for an authority to enter into a contract for an infrastructure project
funded by the Department of Agrarian Reform. In fact, to your mind, the
Sangguniang has continued to refuse the much needed authority so that the
Municipality cannot exercise its corporate power and you cannot implement
the said project. On 10 April 2007, the Sangguniang Bayan had finally
convened but collectively agreed to declare a recess in their regular session
until 14 May 2007.

Based on your representations, you now would like to know the legal
and administrative implications on the Sangguniang Bayan's refusal to
discharge their duties due to their failure to conduct regular sessions for 4
consecutive weeks.

With respect to the Sangguniang Bayan's power to give you an
authority to enter into contract as aforestated, you now ask on whether or
not the Sangguniang Bayan has the absolute power to refuse to favorably act
on matters that are expected to bring about positive results to the lives of
your constituents. What legal action can this level take to demand action
from the concerned august body? You likewise ask if it is possible for them
to collect salaries and other monetary benefits when in fact they are