Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

12 February 2009

DIRECTOR PATRICK D. ONUS
DILG-Cordillera Autonomous Region
Barangay Center, Baguio City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking this level's confirmation on that regional office's legal position in interpreting Section 393 (b) (4) of the Local Government Code pertaining to the educational benefits of barangay officials and their legitimate dependent children. The issue centers on whether or not the dependents of barangay officials are entitled to the educational benefit if they enroll in a state college or university outside the province or city in which the barangay official resides.

In reply to the said issue, that regional office took a position that said Code does not restrict or limit to which school the dependents of barangay officials may enroll. That office is of the view that it is only in the case of barangay and SK officials that the said Code explicitly requires that they should enroll in a state college or university located within the province or city where their barangay belongs.

We concur with the position taken by that regional office. May we restate the pertinent provisions of the Local Government Code on the matter, to wit:

"SEC. 393. Benefits of Barangay Officials.- xxx
(b) The punong barangay, the sangguniang barangay members, the barangay treasurer, and the barangay secretary shall also:

xxx xxx xxx

4. Be exempted during their incumbent from paying tuition and matriculation fees for their legitimate dependent children attending state colleges or universities. He may likewise avail of such educational benefits in a state college or university located within the province or city to which the barangay belongs; and xxx"

"SEC. 434. Privileges of Sangguniang Kabataan Officials.- The sangguniang kabataan chairman shall have the same privileges enjoyed by other sangguniang barangay officials under this Code subject to such requirements and limitations provided herein. During their incumbency, the sangguniang kabataan officials shall be exempt from payment of tuition and matriculation fees while enrolled in public tertiary schools, including state colleges and universities. The national government shall reimburse said college or university the amount of the tuition and matriculation fees: Provided, That, to qualify for the privilege, the said officials shall enroll in the state college or university within or nearest their area of jurisdiction."

A careful reading of Section 393 (b) (4) would reveal that said paragraph consists of two (2) sentences. The first sentence speaks of the exemption from paying tuition and matriculation fees for legitimate dependent children of the punong barangay, the sangguniang barangay members, the barangay secretary and the barangay treasurer. The second sentence, on the other hand, speaks of a situation where it is the above-mentioned barangay officials themselves who would avail of the benefit of free tuition and matriculation fees.

At this point, it bears to stress that the phrase "located within the province or city to which the barangay belongs" is found only in the second sentence of the said paragraph. Hence, said phrase, therefore, should be construed to qualify only the second sentence which refers to a situation where the persons who would want to avail of the benefit of free tuition and matriculation fees are the abovementioned barangay officials themselves.

With respect to the availment of the exemption by the legitimate dependent children of the said barangay officials, the first sentence does not qualify as to whether or not the state college or university is located within or outside the province or city where the barangay belongs. There being no distinction, we should not distinguish. The "qualifier" phrase in the second sentence is not without any purpose. The clear legislative intent of Congress in incorporating the qualifier phrase in the second sentence is to ensure that the discharge of the duties and functions of the barangay officials concerned who avail of the free tuition and matriculation fees shall remain unhampered while they are in schooling.