Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
Cor. Mapagmahal St. Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
DILG OPINION NO. 37 S. 2005
29 July 2005

MAYOR MICHAEL V. FARIÑAS
City of Laoag

Dear Mayor Fariñas:

This is in response to your letter-query seeking the opinion of this Department on the legality of the acts of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of the City of Laoag on the submitted Executive Budget, together with the local development plan of the said city. 

As represented, you submitted your proposed 2005 annual budget to the Sangguniang Panlungsod sometime in the last quarter of 2004. Further, being the ex-officio chairman and presiding officer of the City Development Council (CDC) of the city, you submitted as well the 2005 Annual Development and Investment Plan to the Sangguniang Panlungsod for its approval.

Unfortunately, the Sangguniang Panlungsod returned to the CDC the aforesaid development plan with recommended changes/resolutions/amendments. Because of this, the CDC reconvened again and passed a resolution wherein the very same contents of the development plan it submitted before were reiterated without any amendment. 

After the Sangguniang Panlungsod disapproved the development plan, together with your annual budget proposal, 

As a result of the disapproval, the Sangguniang Panlungsod passed its own version of the budget and development plan incorporating new items which were not included in the aforementioned proposed annual budget and local development plan. In relation to this, the CDC passed a Resolution requesting you to veto the local development plan passed by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, which request you granted by forwarding to the Sangguniang Panlungsod your veto on several items of the local development plan well within the period to do so.

After around one month without any action from the Sangguniang Panlungsod to override the veto, the vetoed plan and budget were submitted to the Sangguniang Panlungsod for review. Surprisingly, eight (8) days after the transmittal, the Sangguniang Panlungsod passed a Resolution purportedly overriding the veto, with eight (8) members in favor and four (4) against. At this juncture, it is pointing out that there are thirteen (13) members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, which includes the Vice Mayor as the presiding officer. The Resolution of the veto was also transmitted to the Sangguniang Panlungsod for review.

Considering the foregoing, you requested this Department to render its opinion on the following issues:
1. The insertion of new items to the executive budget proposed by the local chief executive;
2. The revision by the same body of the 2005 Annual Development and Investment Plan that has been approved by the City
Development Council; and
3. The enactment of a resolution by the Sangguniang Panlungsod overriding the veto of the City Mayor with a vote of only 8 members.

Anent the first issue, this Department is of the view that, as a general rule, insertion of new items in the annual budget proposed by the local chief executive is not allowed. This finds basis in Article 415 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations and as reiterated in Item 4.5, Chapter III of the Budget Operations Manual for LGUs, cited in the DBM Legal Opinion No. L-B-2001-6, and which reads:

"ART. 415. Budget Authorization.

The local sanggunian may not increase the proposed amount in the executive budget nor include new items except to provide for statutory and contractual obligations but in no case shall it exceed the total appropriations in the executive budget." (Underscoring supplied)

"4.5. Limitations on Legislative Action.- The Sangguniang may not increase the proposed amount in the executive budget nor include new items except to provide for statutory and contractual obligations that may not have been considered in the preparation of the budget or that the amounts provided may be deficient. In no case, however, shall such additional provision result to the excess of the total appropriations over the proposed in the executive budget."

Clearly, the aforementioned provision prohibits the inclusion of new items not found in the executive budget. However, by way of an exception thereto, insertion of new items may be allowed if the purpose thereof is to provide for statutory and contractual obligations of the local government unit concerned, which were omitted or may have been overlooked in the preparation of the executive budget and provided further that said insertion should not result to an excess of the total appropriations of the executive budget.

Anent the second issue, this Department is of the view that the Sangguniang Panlungsod has no authority and power to revise a local development plan duly adopted and approved by the local development council. Indeed, as you noted in your letter-query, this Department has been consistent with its position on such an issue and still finds no cogent reason to deviate from the same. As has been explained time and again, it is the primary function of the local development council to formulate and initiate the political unit's comprehensive multi-sectoral development plan and public investment program. Thereafter, the plan and/or program should be submitted to the concerned sanggunian for its appropriate action and approval. However, it has been opined that such submission and approval are only for purposes of enacting the corresponding ordinance so as to comply with the rule that no money should be paid out of the local treasury except in pursuance to appropriations ordinance [Section 305 (a), Local Government Code]. To construe the sanggunian's approval as being inclusive of the authority to revise the projects identified and formulated by the Local Development Council (LDC) would definitely render nugatory the purposes and objectives of the Local Government Code in institutionalizing the LDCs. Thus, if at all the sanggunian should instead return the proposal of the LDC with comments and recommendations for the LDC's proper consideration [DILG Opinions Nos. 149-150-99, 48-02, 84-02, 90-02, 137-03].