REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

August 8, 2007  

MR. ROLANDO B. JARABELO
Barangay Chairman
Barangay Milagrosa, District III
Quezon City

Dear Brgy. Chairman Jarabelo:

This pertains to your letter dated 14 June 2006 where you sought the
Department's legal opinion on the following issues:

1. Is it valid and justifiable reason under RA 7160 otherwise known as
the 1991 Local Government Code, for an elected barangay official
to continuously refuse acceptance of responsibilities delegated by
the Council and Punong Barangay just because for not receiving
honorarium allowance?

2. Can the elected barangay official be liable for any administrative
and or criminal charges inspite of continuing refusal to accept
responsibilities? Such as:

a) Chairmanship of Committees in accordance with
barangay IRP;

b) Compliance from the memorandum of the City Mayor
thru the Barangay Operations Center (BOC);

c) Compliance from the memorandum of the Punong
Barangay delegating other functions, duties and
responsibilities pursuant to Section 392 of RA 7160
known as the Local Government Code.

We answer the first query in the negative. Please take note that
under Section 392 of the 1991 Local Government Code (RA 7160), it is
provided viz:

"SEC. 392. Other Duties of Sangguniang Barangay
Members:- In addition to their duties as members of the
sangguniang barangay, sangguniang barangay members may:

a) Assist the punong barangay in the
discharge of his duties and functions;

b) Act as peace officers in the
maintenance of public order and
safety; and

c) Perform such other duties and
functions as the punong barangay may
delegate".

It is quite clear that the imposition of additional responsibilities by
the punong barangay may be justifiable as additional duties. Non-
performance thereof may give rise to an administrative charge of
"Dereliction of Duty".

Moreover, Section 1 of Article XI of the Philippine Constitution
provides: "Public Office is a public trust. Public officers and employees must
at all times be accountable to the people, serve them with the utmost
responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency act with patriotism and
justice and lead modest lives."

"Compensation is not indispensable to a public office. It is not part
of the office but merely incident thereto, and attaches to the office itself,