Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

21 June 2006

PROVINCIAL DIRECTOR ROSARIO F. MAZA
DILG-Region VI
Fort San Pedro, Iloilo City

Dear Director Maza:

This has reference to your earlier letter-query in connection with the twelve (12) counts of Dishonesty and Grave Abuse of Authority filed before the Sangguniang Bayan (SB) by the Sangguniang Barangay members of Barangay Margubdub, San Remigio, Antique against Punong Barangay Alberto U. Villasor. After due notice and hearing, a decision was promulgated by the SB on February 11, 2005 finding Punong Barangay Villasor guilty for six (6) counts of such charges. He was suspended for 6 months for each count to be served consecutively but not beyond his term of office.

The foregoing events prompted you to seek our legal opinion on the following queries, which we reproduced herein in toto:

"1) Is the conviction of (sic) 6 counts legally right?  
2) Does the sangguniang has (sic) the power to render a penalty of suspension from office for the unexpired portion of his term?  
3) Is the decision tantamount to 'dismissal'? If it is dismissal, is the decision null and void?  
4) Does the decision needs (sic) a specific date for it to take its effectivity since it was not stated in the decision?  
5) If the decision is null and void, can it be implemented?  
6) If the decision is legal, does it need a writ of execution for the punong barangay to comply with the decision?"

You also manifested in your letter that despite such decision, Punong Barangay Villasor still prepared the 2005 budget and was actually approved by the Sangguniang Barangay on August 26, 2005.

On September 5, 2005, first-ranking Sangguniang Barangay Member Nerry A. Villanueva took her oath of office as Acting Punong Barangay. Villanueva also prepared her own version of the 2005 budget.

On September 8, 2005, the budget prepared by Villasor was submitted to and received by the Sangguniang Bayan for review. The budget prepared by Villanueva was also submitted to the Sangguniang Bayan. Up to the date of the letter-query, no action, however, was taken by the Sangguniang Bayan.

Villasor continuously presided over sessions of the Sangguniang Barangay until September 9, 2005.

You again asked an additional query on whether the budget prepared by the Punong Barangay is deemed approved after the lapse of 60 days.

We shall answer your queries in seriatim.

In reply to your first query, we answer in the affirmative. An administrative offense is defined as "every act or conduct or omission which amounts to, or constitutes, any of the grounds for disciplinary action" [Salalima vs. Guingona (257 SCRA 55)]. Given this definition, a single act committed by a public official, whether appointive or elective, is sufficient to constitute any of the grounds for disciplinary action. Several acts committed by such public official in several instances, one act separately committed from the other, is sufficient to find him guilty for several counts of that offense. In the case of Padrones vs. Divinagracia (195 SCRA 675), the Supreme Court found the respondent public employee guilty for two (2) counts of dishonesty for collecting money from two (2) complainants in separate instances and pocketed said amounts.

With regard to your second query, we again answer in the affirmative. The Sangguniang Bayan may impose suspension from office, among others, as a penalty in an administrative case (Article 124, Rules and Regulations Implementing the Local Government Code of 1991). Section 66 (b) of the Local Government Code of 1991 provides for the duration of the penalty of suspension that may be imposed, to wit:

"SECTION 66. Form and Notice of Decision. -- xxx
(b) The penalty of suspension shall not exceed the unexpired term of the respondent or a period of six (6) months for every administrative offense, nor shall said penalty be a bar to the candidacy of the respondent so suspended as long as he meets the qualifications required for the office.
{Emphasis Supplied}

Based on the aforementioned provision, suspension as a penalty may be imposed against a respondent local elective official either for the entire duration of his unexpired term or if he was found guilty for several administrative offenses. The Supreme Court held in the case of Salalima vs. Guingona (supra) that the Office of the President committed no grave abuse of discretion in imposing the penalty of suspension, although the aggregate thereof exceeded six months and the unexpired portion of the erring local elective official’s term of office. The Supreme Court added that what is important is that the suspension imposed for each administrative offense shall not exceed six months and there shall be an express provision in the decision that the successive service of the suspension should not exceed the unexpired portion of the term of the office of the erring local elective official.

Foregoing considered, we are of the view that the subject decision of the Sangguniang Bayan rendering the penalty of suspension against Punong Barangay is valid since all the requirements set forth in the Salalima case are met, as could be gleaned from the dispositive portion thereof, which we quoted as follows:

"WHEREFORE, on the decision of all the members five (5) voted for the suspension, five (5) for acquittal of the respondent, as by substantial evidence, he is found GUILTY in six (6) counts of DISHONESTY AND GRAVE ABUSE OF AUTHORITY and is hereby meted the penalty of six (6) months suspension for each count of administrative offense to be served consecutively but not beyond the term of office pursuant to Section 66 (b) of the Local Government Code of 1991."