REPUBLIC OF THE PHILEPPINLS
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium UH Edsa Cor, Mapagmahal St,

Diliman. Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
NLT OPINION NO.22 §. 2003...
March 15, 2005

PUNONG BARANGAY DOMINGO A. PALAGANAS
Barangay 173, Congress Village
North Caloocan City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion regarding the
propriety of Proposed Resolution No. 40 of the Sangguniang Barangay of
Barangay 173, Congress Village, North Caloocan City, entitled “RESOLUTION
RECOMME!.DING TO THE HONORABLE CITY MAYOR ENRICO “RECOM”
ECHIVERRI THE APPOINTMENT OF FELAGIO V. BALUBAR AS KAGAWAD
TO REPLACE FORMER KAGAWAD EMMA BAFUL.”

It appears from your letter that since November 2002, Kagawad Emma
Baful has not attended the Sanggunian Barangay’s sessions and until now, her
whereabouts are still unknown. This prompted the said sanggunian to file an
administrative charge against her for abandonment. of official duties, through
Resolution No. 08-203 dated 8 February 2003. The case is still pending with the
Sangguniang Panlungsod of Caloocan City as of this time.

You also attached in your letter a copy of Resolution No. 64 of your
Sanggunian Barangay, dated 24 August 2004, resolving not to fill up the position
held by Kagawad Batul in the event that the same is to be declared vacant by the
Sangguniang Panlungsod of Caloocan City. However, on September 2004, the
Sangguniang Barangay of Barangay 173 issued Resolution No. 40
recommending Mr. Pelagio V. Balubar as replacement of Kagawad Baful.
allegedly without your prior nomination.

You now posit the following queries:
1) Is the position vacant?
2) 's Resolution No. 40 valid and proper considering that the
members of the Sanggun’. ng Barangay recommended a certain

person (Mr. Pelagio V. Balubar) without the nomination of the
Punong Barangay?

3) Is it not the Punong Barangay authorized to submit his nominee
to the Sangguniang Barangay for confirmation?

4) Is Section 45(3) which provides that “the city or municipal
mayor, in the case of Sangguniang Barangay, upon

_2.

recommendation of the Sangguniang Barangay concerned,”
vague considering that such can be susceptible of conflicting
interpretations?”

Anent your first query, we are of the considered view that such position is
vacant but only temporary. There exists a temporary vacancy in said position in
view of the fact that the prolonged unauthorized absence of Kagawad Baful
can only be deemed as “temporary incapacity to perform duties for physical
reasons’ per Section 46(a) of the Local Government Code. The situation will not
qualify as a permanent vacancy under Section 44 of RA 7160 (Local Government
Code of 1991), because “permanent vacancy arises when an elected local
official fills a higher vacant office, refuses to assume office, fails to qualify,
dies, is removed from office, voluntary resigns, or is otherwise
permanently incapacitated to discharge the functions of his office.”
Kagawad Baful’s situation does not fall under any of the above-mentioned
circumstances. Even assuming arguendo that Kagawad Baful’s act can be
deemed as refusal to assume office, for it to qualify as a permanent vacancy,
such refusal must be categorically declared and clearly shown, not merely
implied from the acts of the local official. Neither can it be deemed as “removal
from office” as such requires an order of the proper court as a result of an
administrative adjudication on grounds provided by RA 7160 (Section 60) as
declared in the case of Pablico v. Villapando (385 SCRA 601). It is well to note
that the administrative case filed against Kagawad Baful is still pending as of the
present.

Hence, the act of the Sangguniang Barangay of recommending Mr.
Pelagio Balubar as Kagawad Baful’s replacement is premature in view of the fact
that there exists no permanent vacancy yet. Appointment to a vacant position is
proper only in case a permanent vacuum in the position exists. Thus, with
respect to your second query, Resolution No. 40 is not valid and proper, not
because there was no recommendation given by the Punong Barangay since the
same is not required by law, but because such act is premature there being no
permanent vacancy yet in the Sangguniang Barangay that would call for the
application of Section 45(a)(3). Corollarily, your third question must also be
answered in the negative, because granting arguendo that a permanent vacancy
exists, what is provided for by law under Section 45(a)(3) of RA 7160, is that the
appointment in case of vacancy in the Sangguniang Barangay, must be made by
the city mayor concerned upon the recommendation of the Sangguniang
barangay concerned (underscoring ours). Nothing in the law provides for the
Punong Barangay to issue such nomination before the nominee be
recommended by the sangguniang barangay or be appointed by the local chief
executive (the city mayor),

In relation thereto, as to your fourth contention that Section 45(a)(3) is
susceptible of various interpretations, we are of the considered view that the
above-cited provision is clear and unambiguous. Section 45(a)(3) of RA 7160
provides: ,

“Section 45. Permanent Vacancies in the Sanggunian. -
(a) Permanent vacancies in the sanggunian where automatic
successions provided above do not apply shall be filled by
appointment in the following manner:

XXX XXX XXX

~3-

(3) The city or municipal mayor in the case of
Sangguniang barangay, upon recommendation of the
sangquniang barangay concerned.” (underscoring ours)

From the foregoing, it is clear that in cases wherein automatic succession
does not apply, a permanent vacancy in the sangguniang barangay is to be filled
by appointment by the mayor, upon prior recommendation of the sangguniang
barangay concerned. We must emphasize that the required prior
recommendation is a collective act of the sanggunian, and we see no provision
that the Punong Barangay shall first nominate whereupon such recommendation
is to be based. Hence, the questioned provision does not suffer from ambiguity.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

“me YOUrs,

Y om
ANGELO Tf. REYES

Secretary
Ir
OM Repnblic of 44e Philippines
A J) CEPARTMENT OF THE THTERIOR
X AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

cc: DIRECTOR SERAFIN M. BENALDO
DILG - NCR ~
Ground Floor, LMP Building
Ermin Garcia Street WN
Cubao, Quezon City

IN REPLYING, PLS CITE.

SILG05-0050

wv A

Legal:86/Merle

