Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magpahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

24 August 2007

DIRECTOR RODOLFO Z. RAZUL
DILG Regional Office No. XI
Davao City

Dear Dir. Razul:

This refers to your Memorandum dated 05 July 2007, requesting for our opinion on legal issues affecting the conversion of Mati, Davao Oriental, from a municipality into a city.

You stated that the Municipality of Mati, Davao Oriental, was converted into a component city of the same province pursuant to RA 9408, approved on 24 March 2007. Meantime and pending the conduct of the required plebiscite, the set of municipal officials of Mati were duly elected in the 14 May 2007 national and local elections. On 19 June 2007, the conversion of Mati into a city was ratified by the people in a plebiscite conducted by the COMELEC. You now posed the following queries:

1. Can we consider the new set of elective officials as the first elective city officials of the City of Mati considering that the law providing for its conversion into a city was approved on 24 March 2007 prior to the 14 May 2007 national and local elections though its creation was ratified on 19 June 2007?

2. Can we consider the new set of local elective officials as merely a transition one until a new election is held and duly elected officials shall have qualified and assumed their office?

3. Does the phrase "until new election is held" refer to the 2010 elections or an election prior to the same?

4. Considering that as a city, there are ten (10) Sangguniang seats allocated for regular members and that in the last 14 May 2007 elections, there were only eight (8) regular members elected, how and when shall the additional two (2) sets of Sangguniang Members be filled up?

In reply to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 10 of the Local Government Code, thus:

"SEC. 10. Plebiscite Requirement. No creation, division, merger, abolition, or substantial alteration of boundaries of local government units shall take effect unless approved by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite called for the purpose in the political unit or units directed affected. Said plebiscite shall be conducted by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) within one hundred twenty (120) from the date of effectivity of the law or ordinance affecting such action, unless said law or ordinance fixes another date."

It is thus clear under the aforestated Section 10 of the Local Government Code that the creation of Mati as a city will take effect only upon approval by a majority of votes cast in a plebiscite called for the purpose in the political unit directly affected. Thus, technically speaking, the legal creation of Mati as a city took effect only on 19 June 2007 after the people voted affirmatively during the plebiscite conducted for the purpose.

Along this line, it bears to stress that before that time, the municipal officials of Mati were already duly elected in the 14 May 2007 elections and proclaimed, but at the time they assumed office at noon of 30 June 2007, the legal creation of Mati as a city was already effective. At this point, Section 54 of RA 9408, which provides that "The present elective officials of the Municipality of Mati shall continue to exercise their powers and functions until such time that a new election is held and duly elected officials shall have qualified and assumed their office", shall now find application. Accordingly, since the incumbency of the set of elective municipal officials of Mati was overtaken by the effectivity of its creation as a city, we can reasonably consider the present elective officials as the first elective city officials of Mati.

With regard to your second and third queries, same Section 54 of RA 9408 admits of two (2) interpretations, viz: (1) it can be considered as transitory, or (2) it can be considered as permanent.

It is noted that if we construe Section 54 literally, we can get the impression that this may refer to an election other than the 2010 national and local elections. Otherwise, Congress would have easily stated that the municipal officials of Mati shall continue to exercise their powers and functions until the next regular elections.

In order to harmonize these apparent two (2) interpretations, it would be helpful if we examine the Omnibus Election Code. A cursory reading of this Code would reveal that the only instances where a special election to elect public officials may be called by the COMELEC are: (a) with respect to postponement of elections per Section 5; (b) failure of elections per Section 6; and (c) special election to fill up vacancies in Congress per Section 7, as amended by RA 7166, all of the Omnibus Election Code. In this situation, therefore, we doubt if the COMELEC will call for a special elections for the entire set of elective officials of Mati. Such being the case, we can reasonably conclude that while Section 54 of RA 9408 was really meant to be a transitory provision, the set of elective municipal officials are not merely transitory officials but should be considered with permanence until the next regular elections in 2010 since when they assumed office at noon of 30 June 2007, they did so as city officials as the cityhood of Mati was then already effective.