Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

23 February 2009

ATTY. BUENAS AIRES C. DELA CRUZ
Municipal Legal Officer
Barotac Nuevo, Iloilo

Dear Atty. Dela Cruz:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking our legal opinion with regard to the following issues, to wit:

1. Whether the Sangguniang Bayan can reclassify a piece of land from NON-AGRICULTURAL to AGRICULTURAL.

2. The status of a Member of the Sangguniang Bayan who applied for leave of absence for more than thirty (30) days who had already consumed his leave credits.

3. The authority of the Local Chief Executive in the demolition of a public property that was already long abandoned and declared by the building official as a hazard to safety, health or public welfare. Corollary thereto, whether or not the consent of the Sangguniang Bayan is required to be sought before the conduct of demolition.

4. May the Presiding Officer unilaterally adjourn a session without a proper motion from the Sangguniang Members.

In reply to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 3, Article XII of the 1987 Constitution, which in part provides and we quote:

"Section 3. Lands of the public domain are classified into agricultural, forest or timber, mineral lands, and national parks. Agricultural lands of the public domain may be further classified by law according to the uses to which they may be devoted."

- 2 -

Alienable lands of the public domain shall be limited to agricultural lands. xxxx (underlining ours)

From the aforequoted provision of the Constitution, the constitutional classification of lands of the public domain are as follows: agricultural land; forest or timber land; mineral land; and national parks. Among these lands, only agricultural lands of the public domain is declared by the Constitution to be alienable land. It bears to stress that any reclassification/conversion of lands of public domain, as mentioned earlier, is the sole prerogative of the President of the Republic, upon the recommendation of the concerned Department head per Commonwealth Act No. 141. Being the only alienable land of the public domain, agricultural lands may be subjected to alienation or disposition.

May we note that the constitutional provision provides that agricultural lands of the public domain may be further classified by law according to the use thereof. Since the constitutional provision is not self-executing, Section 20 of the Local Government Code would become significant and relevant. Section 20 of the said law provides, in part, that:

"Section 20. Reclassification of Lands.- (a) A city or municipality may, through an ordinance passed by the sangguniang after conducting public hearings for the purpose, authorize the reclassification of agricultural lands and provide for the manner of their utilization or disposition in the following cases: xxx."

Said Section 20 therefore is the law passed by Congress providing for the authority and procedure by which "agricultural lands" under the context of the constitutional classification is to be classified as to its use. Hence, it is evidently clear that the phrase "agricultural land" as appearing in Section 20 of the Local Government Code should be understood as referring to the constitutional classification of lands of public domain under Section 3 of the Constitution, the manner of utilization of which shall be provided for by law. Obviously, being the only alienable land of the public domain, Congress, by express authority from the Constitution, empowered the cities and municipalities to reclassify "agricultural lands" as to their use to which they may be devoted. The classification as to its use would pertain to residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural usage of the land.

Stated differently, the city or municipality cannot reclassify "agricultural lands" into forest land, timber land, mineral land or national parks as the sole authority and prerogative to reclassify this constitutional classification of lands is lodged with the President per Commonwealth Act No. 141. However, with respect to "agricultural lands" of public domain of the State, Congress, through