Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg., EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. FELIMON SEÑO, ET AL
Punong Barangay, Tapuyan
Gasan, Marinduque

Dear PB Seño, et al:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking for our legal opinion,
primarily on whether Punong Barangays and the Sangguniang Kabataan
thereat may be compelled by the Mayor and the Pambayang Pederasyon ng
Sangguniang Kabataan (PPSK) via the issuance of Memorandum No. OM-
2008-215 and PPSK Resolution No. 01 dated 17 May 2008, respectively, to
contribute Five Thousand Pesos (Php5, 000.00) chargeable to whatever
available fund of the SK as financial assistance to the sports competition
e.g. basketball tournament) sponsored by the municipal government and
the PPSK.

Per your letter and its attachments, last August 2008, the municipal
government and the PPSK thereat had sponsored an SK Inter Barangay
Basketball Tournament as part of the celebration of the 399th anniversary of
the establishment of your town. In order to ensure the success of the
sports competition, the PPSK passed PPSK Resolution No. 01, dated 17
May 2008, series of 2008, setting the amount of Php5, 000.00 as
contribution/financial assistance of each Sangguniang Kabataan within the
municipality.

Thereafter, Mayor Victoria Lao Lim issued Memorandum No. OM-
2008-21, dated 24 June 2008, directing all concerned Punong Barangays
and SK Chairmen, that Municipality, to remit their Php5, 000 contribution
to the Sangguniang Kabataan through the Office of the Municipal
Treasurer. In case the SK has not yet made an appropriation for the
aforesaid amount, the Punong Barangays and the SK Chairmen are further
advised to make the appropriation towards that end. Moreover, in case of
failure, Mayor Lao Lim will be constrained to file appropriate administrative
charges against those concerned. Thus, you are now seeking our legal
opinion on these queries, which we quoted in toto, viz:

"With threat of administrative charges against us if we did
not follow her orders under Memo No. OM-2008-215, is the action
of the Mayor to compel us to pay the Php5,000 from the SK fund
proper, in order and not against the law? Is not the SK Council's
budgeting decisions independent of the Mayor's control or for that
matter even the SK Federation's control? Can the SK Federation's
vote to support a project of the Mayor with a budgetary outlay
coming not from the funds of the Federation but from individual SK
Council's be binding on all SK councils? Can the Mayor sanction SK
councils or even barangay councils who do not agree to pay this out
of their individual SK Council or individual barangay fund?"

In your letter, you also enumerated the following points for our
consideration:

1) The Punong Barangays were not party to the PPSK
Resolution;

2) The PPSK members which are composed of the SK
chairmen of each barangay had no prior resolution from their
respective SK council to commit the Php5,000 contribution from the
SK fund of the barangay;

3) The PPSK is an organization of SK chairmen at the
municipal level which has its own officers and governed by its
constitution and by-laws. The act of each individual member SK
chairman does not commit the whole barangay SK council without
any resolution from the SK council, especially if this concerns the
fund of the barangay SK because there are government budgeting,
accounting and auditing rules that need to be followed. The
Federation is a totally different entity from the commitment of its
SK chairman who is the member of the Federation without prior
authorization through a resolution from each SK council. If the
funds concerned are funds of the Federation itself, then there should
be no problem. However, the funds in this case are to be sourced
from each barangay SK funds.

4) Moreover, there is no Memorandum of Agreement
entered into by the PPSK and the Municipal Government of Gasan
that should bind the PPSK;

5) Hence, the contribution appears to be personal
commitment of each SK Chairman and should not bind the barangay
and the SK council.