REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magapagal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
30 June 2008

MR. JOEL M. AVISO
Punong Barangay
Barangay Biñan, Biñan
Laguna

Dear Sir:

This has reference to your letter dated 13 June 2008, seeking further legal clarification on DILG Opinion No. 24, s. 2008, rendered in reply to your earlier query on whether or not an agreement entered into by the former barangay officials of Barangay Malamig and your barangay can be implemented, providing for a 50-50 sharing after lumping the 25% each share from the proceeds of the real property tax of the said barangays.

Our previous study on your earlier query would show that the subject agreement expressly stipulated the 50-50 sharing of the proceeds of the barangay share on real property tax because there was a boundary dispute between the two barangays. In our reply contained in said DILG Opinion No. 24, we said that agreements enjoy the presumption of regularity. May we note, however, that your reply, as contained in said Opinion, was anchored on the premise that there was indeed a boundary dispute.

In your instant query, you informed us that, thru a Certification issued by the local DILG, that on record, there is no boundary dispute existing for the record between Barangays Malamig and Biñan. With this development, you now ask the question as to whether or not it is legal to compromise public funds such as that the allocations for two distinct barangays are combined and divided into half for equal distribution to both barangays. You likewise further sought clarification on the definition of "status quo" in terms of the present situation wherein what exists is a 50-50 sharing on all RPT allocations for both barangays. You asked further whether or not the status quo decision means no change in the present computation of distribution or a return to the normal computation of 100% of real property tax allocation for the individual barangays.

In reply to your instant query, may we invite your attention to Section 271 of the Local Government Code, which provides that:

"SEC. 271. Distribution of Proceeds.- The proceeds of the basic real property tax, including interest thereon xxx shall be distributed as follows:

In the case of provinces:

Province - thirty five (35%) percent shall accrue to the general fund;

Municipality - forty (40%) percent to the general fund of the municipality where the property is located; and

Barangay - twenty five (25%) percent shall accrue to the barangay where the property is located."

Said Section 271 of the Local Government Code further provides, under paragraph (d) thereof, that the share of each barangay shall be released, without need of further action, direct to the Barangay Treasurer on a quarterly basis within five (5) days after the end of each quarter and shall not be subject to any lien or holdback, for whatever purpose.

Relatively, Section 118 of the Local Government Code provides that boundary disputes involving two or more barangays in the same city or municipality shall be referred for settlement to the Sangguniang Panlungsod or Sangguniang Bayan concerned. Corollarily, Article 17 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code provides for the procedure in settling boundary disputes, to wit: the filing of the petition to