Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

9| 0 6 OPINION NO. 7  S. 2009
12 February 2009

MR. CARLITO T. TARIMAN
No. 10 Faisal St., Filinvest II
Quezon City

Dear Mr. Tariman:

This refers to your letter seeking clarification on the legal issue involved
relative to the establishment of your gas refilling station in Virac, Catanduanes.

You stated that pursuant to Municipal Ordinance No. 2006-09, some
necessary permits for the operation of your gas refilling station were issued.
However, said Ordinance was declared by the RTC, Branch 43 of Virac,
Catanduanes, as null and void, which decision was affirmed by the Court of
Appeals 5th Division. There being no more court action that followed, said
decision became final. The court decision likewise directed to recall all permits,
licenses and any other form of authorization issued pursuant to the declared
invalid Municipal Ordinance.

Lately, you applied before the Sangguniang Bayan for a reclassification of
two (2) lots, including the same land where your completed gas refilling station is
located. On 19 January 2009, Municipal Ordinance No. 2009-01 was passed
and approved reclassifying the area where your refilling gas station is located
from residential to commercial. Meantime, pursuant to the provisions of the
Local Government Code, said Ordinance was forwarded to the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan for review, which up to the present, remains pending thereat.

In view of the foregoing representations, you would now like to be clarified
on whether or not you can now immediately open and operate your gas refilling
station upon issuance by the Mayor of the necessary business permit to operate
despite the pendency of the review by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of
Catanduanes of Municipal Ordinance No. 2009-01. This request for clarification
was impelled by your apprehension of the effect of Section 47 of the Revised
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the Municipality of Virac, which provides
that:

"SEC. 47. Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance.-
Changes in the Zoning Ordinance as a result of the view
by the Local Zoning Review Committee shall be treated
as an amendment, provided that any amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance or provisions thereof shall be subject
to public hearing and review evaluation of the Local
Zoning Review Committee and shall be carried out
through a resolution of three fourths vote of the
Sangguniang Bayan. Said Amendments shall take
effect only after approval and authentication by the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan."

Since Municipal Ordinance No. 2009-01 can be categorized as
amendments to the Revised Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of that
municipality, you are now in a quandary as to whether or not Municipal
Ordinance No. 2009-01 is already effective in view also of Section 3 thereof,
which provides that: "Effectivity.- This Ordinance shall take effect
upon approval."

Before dwelling on the specific provisions of the two (2) municipal
ordinances that you mentioned, allow us first to discuss the general provisions
found in the Local Government Code pertaining to the power of review by the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan over municipal ordinances and the effectivity thereof
pending review.

Under Section 56 of the Local Government Code, municipal ordinances
are required to be forwarded to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for review. The
Sangguniang Panlalawigan is required to render its findings on review within
thirty (30) days after submission of such ordinance, otherwise, the same shall be
presumed consistent with law and, therefore, valid.

Along this line, it is also relevant to point out Section 58 of the Local
Government Code, which provides that any attempt to enforce any ordinance
after the disapproval thereof, shall be sufficient ground for the suspension or
dismissal of the official or employee concerned. Also related is Section 59 of the
same Code, which, as to the effectivity of ordinances, provides that unless
otherwise stated in the ordinance, the said ordinance shall take effect after ten
(10) days from the date a copy thereof is posted in a bulletin board at the
entrance of the municipal hall and in at least two (2) other conspicuous places in
the local government unit concerned. With respect to ordinances with penal
sanctions, publication of the same in a newspaper of general circulation within