Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
From the Gold Commandant Bui. 1558 AG
diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

April 11, 2008

MAYOR ERNILO C. VILLAS
Bulalacao, Oriental Mindoro

Dear Mayor Vilas:

This refers to the letter of Atty. Samuel M. Salas, counsel for Punong
Barangay Constancio F. Mendoza, requesting guidance from this Department
on the contested Punong Barangay (PB) position in Barangay Balatasan,
Bulalacao, Oriental Mindoro. Based on aforesaid letter and its attachments
we noted the antecedent facts, to wit:

• In the Synchronized Barangay and SK Elections on 29 October 2007, Mr.
Constancio F. Mendoza garnered the highest number of votes and was
duly-proclaimed by the COMELEC as the elected PB in the
aforementioned barangay.

• An Election Case No. 407-B “Quo Warranto” was filed before the
Municipal Circuit Trial Court of Bulalacao, Mansalay, Oriental Mindoro by
the losing candidate, Mr. Thomas Pajanel.

• The Municipal Circuit Trial Court (MCTC) rendered a Decision dated 22
February 2008 declaring the disqualification of Mr. Mendoza based on the
three-consecutive term limitation. Considering, however, that the case
was for disqualification, the First Kagawad, based on jurisprudence, shall
become the Punong Barangay. This prompted Mr. Pajanel to waive his
claim to be proclaimed as Punong Barangay.

• On 28 February 2008, without waiting for the Writ of Execution from the
court, Mr. Liwanag L. Herato, the First Kagawad, took his oath as Punong
Barangay of Brgy. Balatasan before Mayor Ernilo C. Villas.

• On 3 March 2008 Mayor Villas issued Memorandum Order No. 2008-03-
010 ordering all department heads of the Municipal Government of
Bulalacao “to act only on documents or transaction emanating from the
Sangguniang Barangay of Balatasan with the signature or imprimatur of
PB Liwanag L. Herato.”

• Mr. Herato, as Punong Barangay, issued notices of meetings dated 7 and
8 March 2008 to members of Sangguniang Barangay of Balatasan.

• Copy of the aforesaid MCTC Decision was served to Mr. Mendoza thru
counsel on 7 March 2008 and within the statutory 5-day period of
appeal, a “Notice of Appeal” was filed on 12 March 2008, and the
MCTC, in its Order dated 18 March 2008 issued an “Order” that with the
payment of the corresponding docket and lawful fees, the appeal was
declared perfected.

• Mr. Mendoza in his letter dated 12 March 2008 to Mayor Villas informed
the latter that the MCTC Decision of 22 February 2008 is not yet final
and executory, considering the timely filing of appeal, and requested that
the Memorandum of Mayor Villas dated 3 March 2008 be recalled.

• In your letter-reply to Mr. Mendoza dated 14 March 2008, Mayor Villas,
you rejected the request for the recall of the questioned Memorandum,
insisting that it is based on the Local Government Code and the Court
Decision of 22 February 2008.

Without delving on the merits of the case for being sub-judice, we
would comment on the issue on whether or not the assumption of First
Kagawad Liwanag L. Herato as Punong Barangay of Barangay Balatasan on
the basis of the aforesaid Decision of the MCTC in an election protest case
even without a writ of execution is proper.

Thus, in the case of Policarpio v. COMELEC, et al (G.R. No. 135390,
November 22, 1999), the Supreme Court En Banc held that:

“This is one reason why the Commission in its
Rules of Procedure, provided in Part VI, Rule 35, Section
17, that: xxx The party who in the judgment has been
declared elected shall have the right to assume the
office as soon as the judgment becomes final. In the
case at bench, the judgment of the trial court has not
become final due to the timely appeal of the protestee.
Thus, the right of protestant to assume the office is only
inchoate and will not precipitately ripen through
execution pending appeal.” (underlining ours)

Pertinently, Sections 8, 9 10 and 11, Rule 14 of the A.M. No. 07-4-
15-SC (Rules of Procedure in Election Contest Before the Courts Involving
Elective Municipal and Barangay Officials) provide, that:

“SEC. 8. Appeal.- An aggrieved party may appeal
the decision to the Commission on Elections, within five
days after promulgation, by filing a notice of appeal
with the court that rendered the decision, with copy
served on the adverse counsel or party if not
represented by counsel.

SEC. 9. Appeal fee.- The appellant in an election
contest shall pay to the court that rendered the
decision an appeal fee of One Thousand Pesos.