REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVI
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor.
Magapagal St., Diliman, Quezon City
Tel. Nos.: 9250361 / 9207783 / 9250347 (Fax)
Direct Line: 925-03-30 Fax No.: 925-03-32
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

September 2005

MR. JAYSON G. PASCUAL
Unit 426 Chateau Verde Condominium
Valle Verde I, Pasig City

Dear Mr. Pascual:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the
propriety of the Revenue Ordinance No. 01 s-97 passed by the
Sangguniang Barangay of Barangay Socorro, Cubao, Quezon City.

In reply thereto, please be informed that laws, whether national or
local (ordinance) enjoy the presumption of validity and legality.
Questioning a law or ordinance cannot be made via a request for legal
opinion from this Department but through proper court proceedings.
Moreover, it has been the consistent stand of this Department to adhere
to the rule on the presumption of regularity and validity of the action the
concerned Sangguniang barangay members have undertaken in the
enactment of Revenue Ordinance pursuant to Rule 131, Section 3 (m) of
the Rules of Court.

Parenthetically, Section 187 of the Local Government Code of 1991
(RA 7160) provides for the procedure on how to question or contest a tax
ordinance. It states that:

"SECTION 187. Procedure for Approval & Effectivity of Tax
Ordinances and Revenue Measures; Mandatory Public Hearings –
The procedure for approval of local tax ordinances and revenue measures
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code: Provided, That
public hearings shall be conducted for the purpose of the enactment thereof:
Provided further, That any question on the constitutionality or legality of tax ordinances or revenue measures may
be raised on appeal within thirty (30) days from the effectivity thereof to
the Secretary of Justice who shall render a decision within sixty (60)
days from the date of receipt of the appeal: Provided, however, That such
appeal shall not have the effect of suspending the effectivity of the
ordinance and the accrual and payment of the tax, fee, charge levied
therein: Provided, finally, That within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
decision or the lapse of the sixty-day period without the Secretary of
Justice acting upon the appeal, the aggrieved party may appropriate proceedings with a court of competent jurisdiction."

It is clear from the above-mentioned provision that you should
have exercised your right to question the said revenue ordinance within
30 days from the effectivity thereof and that is on September 8, 1997.

If however, you are bent in questioning the propriety of the subject
ordinance, proper judicial intervention must be undertaken as only the
courts are empowered to declare the invalidity of laws.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGELO T. REYES
Secretary



