Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG OPINION NO. 5  S. 2009
January 20, 2009

MAYOR ERNILO C. VILLAS
SANGGUNIANG BAYAN MEMBERS
Bulalacao, Oriental Mindoro

Dear Mayor Villas and the Honorable SB Members of Bulalacao:

This has reference to the letter of Atty. Samuel M. Salas, counsel of Punong Barangay
Constancio F. Mendoza, requesting this Department to issue a clarificatory letter, to remove
confusion and resolve the conflicting issuances made by the former MLGOO of Bulalacao,
Oriental Mindoro, Mr. Melencio F. Familiarigao, in relation to the Quo Warranto case against PB
Mendoza which is still pending on appeal with the Commission on Elections (COMELEC).

At the outset, please be informed that our previously issued opinion1 addressed to
Mayor Villas of Bulalacao, Oriental Mindoro relative to the aforementioned case is still potent
and has not been supplanted so far. We maintain our comments that "since there is no Writ of
Execution Pending Appeal issued by the MCTC (of Bulalacao), the MCTC's Decision dated 22
February 2008 disqualifying Mr. Mendoza is not yet executor and thus, cannot yet be
implemented. Accordingly, in the meantime, Mr. Mendoza remains as the lawful Punong
Barangay of Balatasan, Bulalacao, Oriental Mindoro."

Furthermore, we also strongly advised Mayor Villas in that opinion that the Oath of
Office of Ms. Liwanag L. Herato on 28 January 2008; the Memorandum Order No. 2008-03-010
dated 3 May 2008; and any notices and issuances to this effect, be recalled, nullified and voided
COMELEC. Apparently, the Oath of Office administered by Mayor Villas on Ms. Herato
circumvented and left for naught Section 11 of the A.M. No. 07-4-15-SC (Rules of Procedure in
the Courts Involving Elective Municipal and Barangay Officials). The
said Oath of Office becomes the convenient mechanism to expedite the assumption to the
Office of Punong Barangay of Bulalacao of Ms. Herato disregarding the rigidity of the notice and
hearing requirements of execution pending appeal of election contest involving municipal and
barangay officials, as provided for in Section 11 of the aforementioned law.

1 DILG Opinion No. 36, series of 2008

Based on the foregoing, be advised that the three (3) issuances made by former MLGOO
Familiarigao, viz: (1) the certification on March 17, 2008 that 1st Kagawad Herato is the PB of
Balatasan in accordance with the Oath of Office administered by Mayor Villas on February 28,
2008; (2) the May 26, 2008 Memorandum to all concerned recalling his aforesaid certification
per advise of the Undersecretary of DILG; and finally, (3) the May 30, 2008 Memorandum to all
concerned stating that his March 17, 2008 certification should not be recalled and remains valid,
are all hereby set aside.

As to your contention that the aforesaid opinion of this Department is just an ordinary
adjudicatory body, thus, our opinion is merely advisory in nature and cannot be a source of
authority to invalidate acts of elective officials. However, pursuant to the power of general
supervision of the President over all local government units, which was delegated to the DILG
Secretary by virtue of Administrative Order No. 267 dated February 18, 1992, the Secretary of
DILG exercises general supervision over local government units. The power of supervision is
defined as "the power of a superior officer to see to it that lower officers perform their
functions in accordance with law."
Supervising officers merely sees to it that the rules are
followed, but he himself does not lay down such rules, nor does he have the discretion to
modify or replace them. If the rules are not observed, he may order the work done or re-done
to conform to the prescribed rules.

At this juncture, may we remind you that as elective officials you are bound by your
oath to uphold the law of the land. Verily, your aforesaid continued defiance of what is lawful
and just may be an avenue for a possible administrative case of abuse of authority against you
based upon Section 60 of the Local Government Code of 1991.

Please be guided accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

OASLAHRD/10
cc: rol Rolando L. Rafael, CESO IV
Regional Director
DILG MIMAROPA Region
Atty. Samuel Salas
109 E. De Leon St., BF Executive Village
Paranaque City

2 JOEL BITO-ONON, petitioner, vs. HON. JUDGE NELIA YAP FERNANDEZ, R.T.C. Br. 50 - Puerto Princesa City
and Palawan, and ELEGIO QUEJANO, JR., respondents. (G.R. No. 139813. January 31, 2001)

3 Supra