REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

14 July 2008

VICE MAYOR LUCITO D. ORAYA
Dolores, Eastern Samar

Dear Vice Mayor Oraya:

This has reference to your letter raising the following issues/queries,
to wit:

1. "Can the Liga Municipal President who is now the Provincial
Liga President continue to hold Office in the Sangguniang Bayan
Hall, maintain control and supervision over employees detailed
to the Office of the Liga Municipal President and continue to
preside over Liga ng mga Barangay Municipal Chapter
meetings?

2. Since our Liga Municipal President could not be ex-officio
member of two sanggunians, what would be his status in the
Liga Municipal Chapter and Sangguniang Bayan of this
Municipality if the Vice President will finally assume as ex-
officio member of the Sangguniang Bayan?

3. If the Liga Municipal Chapter Vice-President will
automatically become an Ex-Officio member of the SB
concerned once the Liga Municipal Chapter President is elected
president of Liga Provincial Chapter as provided for in its
Constitution and By-Laws, why the latter is technically not
considered resigned when his position at the Municipal level is
permanently occupied by his Vice President?

4. Why is the Liga Municipal Vice President entitled to all
benefits as Ex-Officio member of the Sangguniang Bayan when
the Liga Municipal President retains his position in the
municipal level as such while concurrently serving as Provincial
Liga President even though he is no longer suppose to attend SB
sessions?"

Per your representation, the Liga ng mga Barangay Municipal
President was elected as the Liga ng mga Barangay Provincial President of
Eastern Samar and as such, shall sit as ex-officio member of the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan. The Liga ng mga Barangay Municipal Vice
President, invoking the Constitution and By Laws of the Liga ng mga
Barangay, wanted to assume as ex-officio member of the Sangguniang
Bayan but the Sangguniang Bayan of Dolores did not allow his assumption
based on the following reasons, viz:

☐ The assumption of the Municipal Liga Chapter Vice President
in the SB of Dolores is not supported by the Local Government
Code (RA 7160);

☐ The Constitution and By-Laws (CBL) of the Liga cannot be
made the basis of the aforesaid assumption since the same
covers only the internal organization of the Liga and it affects
the composition of other independent organization - the
Sangguniang Bayan;

☐ The Liga CBL has no effect of a law; and

☐ The said CBL is not supertory to any provision of RA 7160.

At the outset, allow us to quote the pertinent provisions of the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), thus:

"SEC. 491. Purpose of Organization.- There shall be an
organization of all barangays to be known as the Liga ng mga
Barangay for the primary purpose of determining the
representation of the Liga in the sanggunians, and for ventilating,
articulating and crystallizing issues affecting barangay
government administration and securing, through proper and legal
means, solution thereto."

"SEC. 492. Representation, Chapter, National Liga.- Every
barangay shall be represented in said liga by the Punong barangay,
xxx."