Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

A. Francisco Gold Condominium I, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DLS OPINION NO._30 S$. 200.5_.

09 May 2005

PUNONG BARANGAY MANUEL &. ALIPON
Barangay Balibago, Sta. Rosa City
Laguna :

Dear Sir:

' This pertains to your request for legal opinion in the matter of
barangay ordinances allegedly not duly acted upon by the Sangguniang
Panlungsod within the prescribed period when submitted to it for review.

In your letter, you stated that in several instances, ordinances passed
by the Sangguniang Barangay of Balibago which were then submitted to the
Sangguniang Panlungsod of Santa Rosa City for review and/or approval,
were not acted upon except for referral to concerned committees and as a

consequence of which, the prescribed period of thirty (30) days for its
review has lapsed.

Alleging that non-action on most important measures caused the
barangay leaders non-delivery or delay in the delivery of services to your
constituents, you now pose the following queries:

1, Can the Barangay of Balibago implement the
unanimously approved barangay ordinances, taking

into account that they are consistent with existing
laws, rules and regulations?

2. What is the status of ordinance/s enacted and
approved by the Barangay but have not been acted
upon, taking into consideration that the prescribed
30-day period has already lapsed?

3. What is the liability on the part of the Sangguniang
Panlungsod?

In reply thereto, an examination of Section 57 of the Local
Government Code is indispensable, and we quote:

“SEC, 57. Review of Barangay Ordinances by the
Sangguniang Panlungsod or Sangguniang Bayan.- (a)
Within ten (10) days after its enactment, the
Sangguniang Barangay shall furnish copies of ail
barangay ordinances to the Sangguniang Panlungsod or

-2.

Sangguniang Bayan concerned for review as to whether
the ordinance is consistent with law and city or
municipal ordinances.

(b) if the Sangguniang Panlungsod or
Sangguniang Bayan, as the case may be, fails to take
action on barangay ordinances within thirty (30) days
from_receipt thereof. the same shall_be deemed
approved. (underlining ours)

(c) If the > Sangguniang Panlungsed or
Sangguniang Bayan, as the case may be, finds the
barangay ordinances inconsistent with law or city or
municipal ordinances, the sanggunian concerned shall,
within thirty (30) days from receipt thereof, return the
Same with its comments and recommendations to the
Sangguniang Barangay concerned for adjustment,
amendment, or modification; in which case, the
effectivity of the barangay ordinance is suspended until

such _time_as_ the revision called for_is_ effected.”
(underlining ours)

May we emphasize at the outset that “validity” is not the same with
“effectivity”. They are twa (2) different things. Validity refers to the
substantive requirement of an ordinance, whether the same is consistent
with the Constitution and laws. Effectivity, on the other hand, is the time by
which an ordinance is made effective and can already be implemented and
given full force and effect. In this regard, it may be well to note that when
the Sangguniang Panlungsod reviews a barangay ordinance pursuant to the
aforequoted Section 57 of the Local Government Code, the subject matter
of the review dwells on the validity only of an ordinance, and not to its
effectivity. Effectivity is governed by Section 59 of the Local Government
Code, such that an ordinance of a local government unit or that of a
barangay in particular, becomes effective as of the date the framers of such
ordinance would like it to be effective, subject to the provisions of Section
59 (a) of the Local Government Code, which provides:

“SEC. 59. Effectivity of Ordinances. or
Resolutions. - (a) Unless otherwise stated in the
ordinance or the resolution approving the local
development plan and public investment Program, the
same shall take effect after ten (1 0) days from the date
a copy thereof is posted in a bulletin board at the
entrance of the provincial capitol or city, municipal, or
barangay hail, as the case may be, and in at least two

(2) other conspicuous places in the local government
unit concerned.”

Accordingly, pending review by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, a
barangay ordinance can already be implemented and given force and effect
as of the date the enacting legislative body would want it to be effective in

~ Be

accordance with the “Effectivity Clause” of the ordinance. This would
precisely explain that under Section 57 (c) of the same Code, it is mandated
that should the Sangguniang Panlungsod or the Sangguniang Bayan, as the
case may be, find the ordinance inconsistent with law or city or municipal
Ordinance, the sanggunian concemed shall retum the same with its
comments and recommendations to the Sanggunian concerned for
adjustment, amendment or modification of the ordinance under review, and
in such a case, the effectivity of the barangay ordinance is suspended until
such time that the revision called for is effected.

With respect to your second query on what is the status of a barangay
ordinance if the 30-day period prescribed under the Local Government Code
within which for the Sangguniang Panlungsod to act has lapsed without
action made from the same sanggunian, please be informed that this
Department has consistently opined that when a power is given, and that the
power is to be exercised within a prescriptive period, then such prescriptive
period is considered a limitation to such power. This is consistent with the
Principle that “where a statute prescribes a time within which a
public officer is to perform official acts affecting the rights of
others, it is directory as to the time, unless from the nature of the
act, the designation of time must be considered a limitation on the

power of the officer” (50 Am Jur, 23, Pp. 46, cited by Alcantara, Samson
in his book Statutes, 1990 Ed.)

Corollary thereto, this Department had consistently opined that in
interpreting Section 57 (b) of the Local Government Code, to wit: “(b) If
the Sanqquniang Pantungsod or Sangguniang Bayan, as the case
may be, fails to take action on barangay ordinances within thirty
(30) days from_ receipt thereof, the same shall be deemed
approved”, the phrase “take action” should be construed as either
approval or disapproval of the ordinance and not just any other action of the
reviewing sanggunian, such as referral to a committee.

Our interpretation as to the mandatory character of the 30-day period
to take action is impelled by public policy. Barangay ordinances should
attain stability at a given point in time. Otherwise, it would render barangay
ordinances unstable and may even result to the subservience of the lower
Sanggunian to the higher sanggunian considering that the latter can
invalidate the ordinance on review at any time it pleases and may even
arbitrarily or whimsically disapprove an ordinance which has already been
implemented for quite a long time. Moreover, ordinances are presumed
valid until the contrary is decreed by the reviewing authority or the courts.

With respect to liability, may we note that when the Sangguniang
Panlungsod reviews a Sangguniang Barangay Ordinance, three (3) options
for that sanggunian are available, to wit: (1) expressly declare the ordinance
to be inconsistent with law or city ordinances and provide for such proposed
amendments, modifications or.adjustments, or (2) declare that the barangay
ordinance is inconsistent with law and city ordinance, or (3) simply allow the

~4-

50-day period to take action on the review of the barangay ordinance to
lapse, in which case, the Sangguniang Panlungsod’s failure to act on the
barangay ordinance within the said period can be, by legal presumption,
deemed approved per Section 37 (b) of the Local Goverment Code.

Accordingly, when the Sangguniang Panlungsod simply allowed the
50-day period to lapse, then the legal conclusion would be, your ordinances
are deemed approved and there will be no more need for you to wait for any
action from the Sangguniang Panlungsod. Hence, since the law recognizes a
situation where the Sangguniang Panlungsod can just simply let the 30-day

period to lapse as anyway the law provides for its consequential legal effect,
no liability will attach.

We hope to have enlightened you accordingly.

Very truly yours,

ANGELO T. REYES
Secretary
! oardurmer of eet
Legal:43/La i AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

IW REPLYING, PLE CITE

SILG05-006359

cc: Director Leonilo B. Lariosa UU A

DILG Region IvV-A
Calderon Bldg., EDSA
Diliman, Quezon City

