REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City
 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
 
 N.I.G. OPINION 49 S. 2005
25 August 2005

ATTY. ABDUL A. BASAR
Suite 202 Edsol Seyer Building
1175 A. Mabini Street
Ermita, Manila

Dear Atty. Basar:

This pertains to your letter inquiring on whether or not a certain Vice Governor of South Cotabato in the person of Elvord U. Ubena is allowed and/or authorized to practice law.

May we inform you that per verification of our records, the
furthermore, Vice Governor of South Cotabato is Elvord Ogena.
Further, please be informed that this Department does not issue
authority to practice law to elective local officials.

The matter is governed by Section 90 (b) of the Local
Government Code (RA 7160), which provides:

"SEC. 90. Practice of Profession. - (b)
Sangguniang members may practice their professions,
engage in any occupation, or teach in schools except
during session hours: Provided, That sangguniang
members who are also members of the Bar shall not:

a) Appear as counsel before any court in any case
wherein in a local government unit or any office,
agency, or instrumentality of the government is the
adverse party;

b) Appear as counsel in any criminal case where an
officer or employee of the national or local
government is accused of an offense committed in
relation to his office;

c) Collect any fee or their appearance in administrative
proceedings involving the local government unit of
which he is an official; and

d) Use property and personnel of the government except
when the sangguniang member concerned is defending
the interest of the government."

Accordingly, the Vice Governor, being a Member of the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan (Sec. 467 [a], RA 7160) is allowed to
practice law, subject to the limitations set forth in the aforesaid
provision.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGEL T. REYES
Secretary

Legal:68/La
cc: Director Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG National Capital Region
LMP Building, Ermin Garcia St.
Cubao, Quezon City


No Basis