REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

October 15, 2007

MR. ALFREDO M. VALDEZ JR.
Liga ng mga Barangay President
Matalam, Cotabato

Dear Mr. Valdez:

This has reference to your letter inquiring if whether or not you are violating any existing law if you cannot provide the Php10,000.00 requested by the local COMELEC to augment their fund for the forthcoming Barangay and SK Elections.

Before answering your query, allow us to cite the salient feature of the pertinent law which is RA 9340, viz:

"Section 4. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 9164 is hereby amended to read as follows:

'Section 8. Appropriation - The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be taken from the appropriation of the Commission on Elections under the General Appropriation Act and/or supplementary appropriations thereafter.

In addition, the savings of the COMELEC not exceeding Three hundred million pesos (P 300,000,000.00) shall be used to augment said appropriations as authorized under COMELEC Special Provision No. 2 of Republic Act No. 9162.

The funds mentioned above may be augmented by an amount not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the sangguniang kabataan funds reserved pursuant to Section 532 (c) of Republic Act No. 7160.'" (Underlining ours)

Be it noted that the aforequoted provisions particularly on the augmentation of COMELEC funds for the Synchronized Barangay and SK Elections is permissive only and not self-executory. Thus, the declaration as to the need to augment the COMELEC funds for the aforesaid elections is imperative to effectuate the 3rd paragraph of Section 8 as aforequoted.

Accordingly, on July 17, 2007 the COMELEC issued an instructions/guidelines on the sharing of cost for the 2007 Barangay and SK Elections in response to the request of LGUs of said guidelines. It further instructed its Executive Director to implement the same. Hereunder is the cost-sharing scheme resolve by COMELEC, thus:

Expenditures					Agency Responsible
					COMELEC	LGU	NYC
Printing of Ballots and
election forms							 x	 
Supplies and other election
paraphernalia						 	x	
Shipping of ballots, election
forms, supplies, and other
election paraphernalia						 x	
Transportation allowance of
BET member (P 300/BET
member)						 	x	
Honoraria of Sangguniang
Kabataan Registration
Committee						 	x	
Barangay Elections
registration information
dissemination						 x	
Sangguniang Kabataan
Registration information
dissemination						 	x	
B & SK Elections Information
Dissemination				50%	25%	25%
Honoraria of BET members
(P1,000/BET member)						 	x	
Additional honoraria of BETs
also handling SK precinct
(P500.00/BET member)						 x

This guideline/instruction executed the provisions of RA 9340,
particularly on the augmentation of funds from the SK funds.