Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

12 June 2008

AITV. ALEJANDRO R. ABESAMIS
Provincial Administrator and Concurrent
Provincial Legal Officer - OIC
Provincial Capitol Building
Palayan City

Dear Atty. Abesamis:

This has reference to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the following issues involving the confirmation of your appointment as Provincial Administrator of Nueva Ecija by the Sanggunian Panlalawigan thereof, viz:

A. "Whether the Sanggunian Panlalawigan may deny the confirmation of my appointment based on ground which is not any of the qualifications for Provincial Administrator enumerated in Section 480, Article 10 of RA 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991; and

B. Whether the Sanggunian Panlalawigan which has otherwise found me as possessing all the qualifications but nevertheless denied my confirmation on ground not specified in the law may legally be deemed to have confirmed my appointment just the same."

Among others, you represented that all the Sanggunian Panlalawigan members during its deliberation on the confirmation of your appointment as Provincial Administrator signified either directly or indirectly that you have all the qualifications as provided for in Section 480 of the Local Government Code. However, despite thereof, the Sanggunian did not confirm your appointment by a vote of 4-6 with one member abstaining.

Apparently, based on the attached excerpt of the aforesaid deliberation the six (6) Sanggunian Panlalawigan members voted "no" to your confirmation as Provincial Administrator because they were of the belief that either you cannot be an effective Provincial Administrator for you failed to recommend and/or advise the Vice Governor, who was then the Acting Governor when the Governor of Nueva Ecija was on leave of absence, on matters relative to the management and administration of Nueva Ecija when you were still the Provincial Administrator, and on the

anticipation of diversity between the executive and the legislative branches in the Province of Nueva Ecija should you be again the Provincial Administrator. Both apprehensions based on the Memorandum you issued then as the Provincial Administrator advising the employees of the provincial government of your securing legal opinion from this Department on the legality of the series of Memoranda issued by Vice-Governor Edward Thomas Joson in his capacity as Acting Governor. Said Memoranda directed certain officials and employees to assume and perform the functions of certain offices effectively replacing the officials appointed by Governor Umali. The aforesaid DILG’s legal opinion did not favor Acting Governor Joson’s aforementioned acts. Indeed, based thereon, you issued another Memorandum saying that the "acts committed by concerned officials by virtue under the authority of illegal memorandum despite knowledge of the DILG opinion shall be deemed in bad faith and be severely dealt with". This latter Memorandum allegedly caused the non-confirmation of your appointment by the Sanggunian Panlalawigan.

May we invite your attention to Section 463 (d) of the LGC of 1991, which provides that:

"Section 463. Officials of the Provincial Government

xxx xxx xxx

(d) Unless otherwise provided herein, heads of departments and offices shall be appointed by the governor with the concurrence of the majority of all the sanggunian panlalawigan members, subject to civil service law, rules and regulations. The sanggunian panlalawigan shall act on the appointment within fifteen (15) days from the date of its submission; otherwise the same shall be deemed confirmed;

On the other hand, Section 480 (a) of the LGC provides, thus:

"Section 480. Qualifications, Term, Power and Duties. - (a) No person shall be appointed administrator unless he is a citizen of the Philippines, a resident of the local government unit concerned, of good moral character, holder of a college degree preferably in public administration, law, or any other related course from a recognized college or university, and a first grade civil service eligible or its equivalent. He must have acquired experience in management and administration work for at least five (5) years in the case of the provincial or city administrator, and three (3) years in the case of the municipal administrator."

Corollary to the foregoing, Section 1 (e), Rule V of Civil Service Commission Memorandum Circular No. 40, s 1998, provides that "appointment in local government units for submission to the Commission shall be accompanied, in addition to the common requirements, by the following: xxx (ii) Certification by the Municipal/City/Provincial Accountant/Budget Officer.