REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. JOSE EDGARDO A. GOMEZ JR.
ADB Consultant and SSL Team Leader
No. 6, ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City

Dear Mr. Gomez:

This refers to your letter, endorsed by Mr. Victor B. Endriga, Quezon City Treasurer and the President of the Philippine Associations of Treasurers and Assessors (PHALTRA), requesting our legal opinion on whether Local Government Units (LGUs) can participate in the proposed Sub-Sovereign Lending (SSL) facility of the Asian Development Bank (ADB).

Your letter was impelled by the existing DOJ and DILG Opinions discouraging LGUs from directly securing foreign loans pursuant to the provisions of Sections 301 and 297 or RA 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 (LGC).

You represented the following, among others:

1. ADB is a multilateral finance institution created by a treaty to which the Philippines is party.

2. SSL is a lending facility being developed by ADB for LGUs, in which ADB will lend directly to LGUs either through direct loans or by purchasing LGU bonds.

3. SSL is a departure from the current practice of channeling multilateral agency funding through the National Government (NG) that in turn re-lends the funds to LGUs.

4. SSL allows the National Government to reallocate to other critical uses resources that are currently devoted to processing on-lending facilities for LGUs.

5. ADB will not require a direct guarantee from the National Government. This relieves the NG of the burden of incurring contingent liability and coincides with its debt stock reduction initiatives.

6. ADB will lend to LGUs in Philippines Peso to eliminate foreign exchange risks for the LGUs.

At the outset, please be informed that in conformity of the prevailing view, pursuant to a number of opinions issued by the Department of Justice and this Department (DILG Opinion Nos. 72-94; 145-03 and DOJ Opinion Nos. 39 s. 1997; 071 s. 1997; 062 s. 1998), LGUs cannot directly secure or contract foreign loans based principally on an interpretation of Section 301 in relation to Section 297 of the LGC.

Nevertheless, taking into consideration the "personality" of ADB, to our mind, we have to understand first the sources of international law and delve into the relationship between an International Law and Municipal Law before we dispose of your request, thus:

As to sources of international law

Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) directs the Court to apply the following in deciding a case before it:

a. international conventions, whether general or particular, establishing rules expressly recognized by the contesting States;

b. international customs, as evidence of a general practice accepted as law;

c. the general principles of law recognized by civilized nations; and

d. subject to the provisions of Article 54, judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations, as subsidiary means for determination of rules of law.