REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

12 June 2008

MS. EMMA LOURDES C. DE JESUS, et al.
Barangay Kagawa
Barangay Siena, Quezon City

Gentlemen/Ladies:

This pertains to your letter inquiring from this Department the following matters raised, to wit:

1. "Salaries of personal staff of Punong Barangay Benjamin Rivera. Those people were appointed only by the Punong Barangay without discussing (sic) and approval of the Sangguniang Barangay since December of 2007 up to the present. Note that the Barangay elected officials has (sic) not yet received any remuneration since December of 2007 despite our verbal and written demands. In order for us, barangay elected official to receive our allowances, the punong barangay is insisting to state the names of his personnel into the payroll and receive salaries even without proper attached appointments.

2. The Sangguniang Barangay Council had filed a resolution last January 19, 2008 concerning 3 check signatories as a requisite before check releasing, Punong Barangay, Barangay Treasurer and 1 Sangguniang Barangay member to protect the Barangay funds. Note that there were already records of malversation of funds and was amicably settled.

Therefore, in order to eradicate the occurrence, the one member filed a resolution signed by the majority of the members for adoption but unfortunately the Punong Barangay failed to sign it."

In your first query, you mentioned the term "personal staff" of the Punong Barangay. To our mind, such personal staff connotes two (2) kinds, namely: (1) those staff of the punong barangay whom he hired to attend to his needs and whose salaries are personally borne by the Punong Barangay, so therefore, their appointments no longer require the approval of the majority of the sangguniang barangay members; or (2) those staff of the punong barangay whose positions were created through a barangay ordinance pursuant to the second paragraph of Section 387 of the Local Government Code, referring to the power of the barangay to create additional positions as it may deem necessary for the operations of the barangay and,in relation to Section 396 of the same Code, are appointed by the Punong Barangay.

Coming now to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 387 of the Local Government Code. Said Section enumerated the main barangay officials in the barangay government, namely: the Punong Barangay; the Sangguniang Barangay Members; the Barangay Treasurer; the Barangay Secretary; the SK officials; the Barangay Tanods and the Lupong Tagapamayapa.

In relation thereto, and as discussed above, the second paragraph of Section 387 conferred unto the barangay government the power to create additional barangay positions as it may deem necessary for the efficient and effective operation of the barangay. The creation of additional barangay positions shall be done through an appropriate barangay ordinance, subject to availability of funds and the 55% personal services limitation on barangay budget.

Along this line, may we emphasize that with respect to Barangay Secretary, Barangay Treasurer and Lupong Tagapamayapa, the Local Government Code provided for the specific manner and procedure by which these barangay officials are to be appointed.

With respect to the Barangay Secretary and the Barangay Treasurer, Sections 394 and 395 of the Local Government Code provides that they shall be appointed by the Punong Barangay with the concurrence of the Sangguniang Barangay. On the other hand, with respect to the Members of the Lupong Tagapamayapa, Section 399 of the Local Government Code provides that the Members of the Lupun shall be appointed by the Punong Barangay from among the persons whom he determines to be suitable therefor. In relation thereto, it bears to stress that the Local Government Code did not specify the manner of