                                REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
                            DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
                          Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagkakatawid St.,
                                         Diliman, Quezon City


                              OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

                                                                                       18 June 2007

MR. FRANCISCO L. RAMOS, JR.
Sangguniang Bayan Member
Mercedes, Camarines Norte

Dear Sir:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on whether or not you can re-assume your position as Sangguniang Bayan Member before your present term ends on noon of 30 June 2007 and thereafter draw your salary and other emoluments in view of your re-election during the recently concluded 14 May 2007 synchronized national and local elections and your subsequent full service last 23 May 2007 of the penalty of suspension imposed earlier by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Camarines Norte.

As you represented in your letter, you were previously elected as Sangguniang Bayan Member of that municipality in the 2004 local elections. Meantime, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Camarines Norte found you guilty in an administrative case for Grave Misconduct and Dishonesty and thereupon meted upon you the penalty of suspension from office. You then filed an appeal therefrom before the Office of the President. Pending such appeal, you were reelected in the same position in the recently concluded 14 May 2007 synchronized national and local elections and in fact, placed first in the ranking as evidenced by the Certificate of Canvass of Votes and Proclamation of the Winning Candidates for Municipal Offices issued by the Canvassers. In two (2) letters both dated 20 May 2007, you informed your Vice-Mayor and the Office of the President thru Executive Secretary Eduardo R. Ermita that you were re-elected as Sangguniang Bayan Member and that you intended to re-assume office on 24 May 2007. Meantime, on 23 May 2007, your penalty of suspension already expired after fully serving when you came to this Department for a follow-up on your query, you further represented that when you tried to re-assume your office other members of the Sangguniang Bayan objected thereto and your name was removed from the payroll up to present. Hence, your query.

It is our view that, under the circumstances obtaining, there is no longer any impediment for your re-assumption as Sangguniang Bayan Member. In the case of Aguinaldo vs. Santos (212 SCRA 768), your re-election as Sangguniang Bayan Member has the effect of obliterating the pending administrative case filed against you. This is the so-called principle of condonation in administrative cases. By applying the administrative case, even at the appeal stage, is rendered moot and academic leading to its dismissal. Let it be noted however that the Office of the President cannot motu propio dismiss the administrative case filed against you. You have to first inform them and show proof of the fact that you were indeed re-elected. Hence, we found proper your letter dated 20 May 2007 addressed to Executive Secretary Eduardo Ermita informing them of the fact that you were re-elected.

Be that as it may, even on the assumption that the principle enunciated above may not apply to your case, it bears to note that you have already completed the full service of your penalty of suspension. Such full service of the penalty of suspension would now entitle you to reassume and discharge the functions and powers of your office as Sangguniang Bayan Member from 24 May 2007 up to noon of 30 June 2007, which is the remaining period of your present term (2004-2007). Such re-assumption would entitle you to the salary and all other benefits appurtenant to your position corresponding to the remaining period as mentioned.

With regard to your query as to whether you can draw your salaries and other emoluments in view of your re-election, we note that the subject matter of your query is not, however, clear on whether or not you are referring to the salaries and other emoluments covering the period while you were serving your penalty of suspension. Nonetheless, if you are referring to the salaries and other emoluments that could have accrued during the time when you served your penalty of suspension, may we call your attention to Section 68 of the Local Government Code which explicitly provided that it is only in the event that you were exonerated that you shall be paid your back salaries and other emoluments during the pendency of your appeal.

Along this line, exoneration is different from condonation. In exoneration, the appellate body will reverse the judgment after finding that the lower body erred in finding the respondent guilty. In condonation, however, the administrative misconduct committed by the respondent is simply placed in oblivion, meaning, to be forgotten. We are, therefore, of the view that notwithstanding your re-election and the full service of your penalty of suspension, the Office of the President may nonetheless proceed in resolving your appeal if only to determine if the lower body erred in finding you guilty as charged and should you be exonerated, it may entitle you to back salaries and other emoluments during the pendency of your appeal.