Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

April 24, 2008

MR. PAMFILO DE VILLA, ET AL
Barangay Kagawads
Barangay Maria Paz, Tanauan City

Gentlemen:

This refers to your letter posing the following query, to wit: "xxx dapat naming kilalanin ang panunungkulan ni G. Napoleon O. Ramos bilang Punong Barangay kahit na siya ay nanumpa sa tungkulin ng wala pang writ of execution?".

Your foregoing query was impelled by the assumption as Punong Barangay (PB) of Mr. Napoleon O. Ramos by virtue of a Municipal Trial Court's (MTC) Decision proclaiming him as the winner in the Punong Barangay position of Maria Paz, Tanauan City in an election contest he filed against the formerly proclaimed PB Mr. Manuel C. Balba despite absence of a Writ of Execution enforcing said Decision.

Per your representation, and as evidence by an attached copy of the Notice of Appeal by the respondent-appellant Manuel C. Balba and an Order of the MTC dated 4 February 2008 forwarding to the COMELEC the records of the subject election protest case, Mr. Manuel C. Balba perfected an appeal within the statutory period and the same together with the original records of said case were forwarded by the aforesaid MTC to the COMELEC on 7 February 2008.

The issue you are raising now is whether or not the assumption of the protestant, Mr. Napoleon O. Ramos, on the basis of the Decision of the MTC in an election protest case is proper even without a Writ of Execution yet.

Thus, in the case of Policarpio v. COMELEC, et al (G.R. No. 135390, November 22, 1999), the Supreme Court En Banc agreed with the COMELEC when it held that:

"The Commission has consistently ruled that when an election protest is filed, the protestee is only considered a presumptive winner until the protest is resolved, in the same way, when a protestant is adjudged the winner by a court of law but the case is on appeal with the Commission, such appeal likewise makes the protestant a presumptive winner and, unless meritorious grounds exist to execute judgment pending appeal, it is illogical to replace a presumptive winner proclaimed by the board of canvasser by another presumptive winner so declared by a court."

In the same case, the Court further averred, viz:

"This is one reason why the Commission in its Rules of Procedure, provided in Part VI, Rule 35, Section 17, that: "xxx The party who in the judgment has been declared elected shall have the right to assume the office as soon as the judgment becomes final. In the case at bench, the judgment of the trial court has not become final due to the timely appeal of the protestee. Thus, the right of protestant to assume the office is only inchoate and will not precipitately ripen through execution pending appeal."

Pertinently, Sections 8 and 11, Rule 14 of the Rules of Procedure in Election Contest Before the Courts Involving Elective Municipal and Barangay Officials provide, that:

"SEC. 8. Appeal. - An aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the Commission on Elections, within five days after promulgation, by filing a notice of appeal with the court that rendered the decision, with copy served on the adverse counsel or party if not represented by counsel."

"SEC. 11. Execution pending appeal. - On motion of the prevailing party with notice to the adverse party, the court, while still in possession of the original records, may, at its discretion, order the execution of the decision in an election contest before the expiration of the period to appeal, subject to the following rules:

(a) There must be a motion by the prevailing party with three-day notice to the adverse party. Execution pending appeal shall not issue without prior notice and hearing. There must be good reasons for the execution pending appeal. The court, in a special order, must state the good or special reasons justifying the execution pending appeal. Such reasons must:

(1) constitute superior circumstances demanding urgency that will outweigh the injury or damage should the losing party secure a reversal of the judgment on appeal; and

(2) be manifest, in the decision sought to be executed, that the defeat of the protestee