REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

27 July 2006

VICE MAYOR JOVITO E. ELLORIN
Santiago, Ilocos Sur

Dear Vice Mayor Ellorin:

This refers to your request for this Department's opinion regarding your Municipal Budget Officer who is a United States green card holder.

In particular, you ask the following, to wit:

1. "Can he occupy an appointive position?

2. Can the Mayor allow him to take a yearly vacation leave outside the country for six (6) consecutive months?"

Before addressing your first query, may we first state the general qualifications of a Budget Officer. Section 475 (a) of the Local Government Code (RA 7160) provides:

"SEC. 475. Qualifications, Powers and Duties.- (a)
No person shall be appointed budget officer unless he is a citizen of the Philippines, a resident of the local government unit concerned, of good moral character, a holder of a college degree preferably in accounting, economics, public administration or any related course from a recognized college or university; and a first grade civil service eligible or its equivalent. He must have acquired experience in government budgeting or in any related field for at least five (5) years in the case of the provincial or city budget officer, and at least three (3) years in the case of the municipal budget officer."

Particular attention is invited on the requirement that a budget officer needs to be a citizen of the Philippines as the same is relevant to your disclosure that your municipality's budget officer is a US green card holder.

In the case of Caasi vs. Court of Appeals (191 SCRA 229), it can be inferred that a person who is issued a US Green Card is entitled to reside permanently and work in the United States, but without bestowing upon such person the status of a citizen of the said country, thus, a mere RESIDENT ALIEN.

Otherwise stated, a Resident Alien of the United States of America does not lose his/her original citizenship.

Ergo, while your Budget Officer may have acquired the right to reside permanently in the United States by virtue of his being a green card holder, he never lost his Filipino citizenship and, therefore, never lost his citizenship eligibility to be appointed to an appointive position in the government. Such rule is, however, not true with respect to elective officials since per Section 40 of the Local Government Code, a person holding a right to permanently reside in another country is a ground to disqualify him to be a candidate for any local elective position.

Your second query is answered in the affirmative. Leave of absences of appointive local officials under the supervision and control of the Local Chief Executive is within the authority of the latter to approve based on his sound discretion, subject to existing Civil Service Laws, Rules and Regulations.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal:87/La
cc: Director Manuel V. Biason
DILG Regional Office No. 01
San Fernando City, La Union