REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

2008
20 February 2008

VICE-MAYOR BENJAMIN C. DEL ROSARIO, M.D.
Cabuyao, Laguna

Dear Vice-Mayor del Rosario:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on whether there is any legal impediment in the implementation of the following Resolutions approved by the Sangguniang Bayan of Cabuyao, that province, to wit:

1) Kapasiyahan Bilang 01-2007 - Kapasiyahang pinagtibay ng Liga ng mga Barangay na humihiling sa Sangguniang Bayan sa pamamagitan ng Punombayan, Kgg. Isidro L. Hemedes, Jr. na pagkakalooban ng Php20,000 ang bawat isang Punong Barangay bilang pamaskong handog; and

2) Kapasiyahan Bilang 02-2007 - Kapasiyahang pinagtibay ng Liga ng mga Barangay na humihiling sa Sangguniang Bayan sa pamamagitan ng Punombayan, Kgg. Isidro L. Hemedes, Jr. na mabigyan ang mga Punong Barangay ng halagang Php200,000 at Php100,000 naman ang para sa Barangay Kagawad para sa kanilang tatlong (3) terminong pagliilingkod na walang patlang bilang mga halal na opisyal.

In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to Section 305 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), which provides and we quote:

"SECTION 305.- Fundamental Principles . The financial affairs, transactions and operation of local government units shall be governed by the following principles:

(a) No money shall be paid out of the local treasury except in pursuance of an appropriations ordinance or law; xxx"

Based on the foregoing, before any money shall be paid out of the local treasury or any disbursement is made therefrom, a law or an ordinance authorizing such an appropriation should be enacted first.

Applying this rule to your case, please be advised that since the grants contained in the two resolutions would involve the disbursement of public money to be paid out of the local treasury, the monetary grant should be contained in an ordinance by way of a supplemental appropriations ordinance and not through a mere resolution.

At this juncture, may we apprise you that an ordinance is different from a resolution. The former is a law, which prescribes a permanent rule of conduct while the latter is merely a declaration of the sentiment or opinion of a lawmaking body or a specific matter. An ordinance is of a general and permanent character, while a resolution is temporary in nature (Municipality of Parañaque vs. V. M. Realty Corporation, 292 SCRA 678). Moreover, an ordinance, per Section 54 of the Local Government Code, shall require the approval of the Local Chief Executive, whereas, resolutions do not require such approval except in the case of resolution approving the local development plan and public investment program of the municipality.

On the substantive aspect on whether or not the municipality can give such grants to barangay elective officials, may we invite your attention to Section 393 of the Local Government Code, which says:

"SEC. 393. Benefits of Barangay Officials.- (a) Barangay officials, including barangay tanods and members in the lupon.tagapamayap, shall receive honoraria, allowances, and such other emoluments as may be authorized by law or barangay, municipal or city ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this Code, but in no case shall it be less than One Thousand Pesos (P1,000.00) per month for the punong barangay and Six Hundred Pesos (P600.00) per month for the sangguniang barangay members, barangay treasurer, and barangay secretary: Provided, however, That the annual appropriations for personal services shall be