Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
B. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY
15 January 2007

MR. OSCAR J. LIM
36 F. Mayon St., cor. Dapitan St.
Sta. Mesa Heights
Quezon City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter inquiring on the propriety of an elected local
official (Png. Bgy. Reynante Lim, Sr. of Bgy. Semirara, Caluya, Antique) entering
into contract with the National Power Corporation (NPC).

Per attached Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), the agreement is for
Png. Bgy. Lim to do services on the collection, hauling/transport of oil-
contaminated materials resulting from oil spillage brought about by the accidental
running aground of a power barge while being towed by the NPC tugboat at the
north east of Semirara Island, Caluya, Antique. These oil-contaminated
materials will be permanently dumped at a land owned by Png. Bgy. Lim shall
secure the necessary clearances, approvals and permits from the Barangay
Council and DENR.

Of particular, you inquired whether or not it is legal for an elected local
official like Png. Bgy. Lim to enter such contract.

Please be informed that the laws relevant in determining the legality of
Png. Bgy. Lim's act of entering into such contract viewed in the light of his being
an elected local official are Republic Act No. 3019 (Anti-Graft and Corrupt
Practices Act) and Republic Act No. 6713 (Code of Conduct and Ethical
Standards for Public Officials and Employees).

Relatively, while the undertaking pursued by Png. Bgy. Lim is in his private
capacity, he (Png. Bgy. Lim) is however required under said MOA to secure the
clearances and permit from the Sangguniang Barangay where the project is to be
undertaken which is the Sangguniang Barangay of Semirara where Png. Bgy.
Lim is the sitting local chief executive.

Upon this consideration, Section 3 (h) and (i) of RA 3019 provides:

"(h) Directly or indirectly having financial or pecuniary interest in any
business, contract or transaction in connection with which he intervenes or takes
part in his official capacity xxx"

(i) Directly or indirectly becoming interested, for personal gain, or having a
material interest in any transaction or act requiring the approval of a board, panel
or group of which he is a member, and which exercises discretion in such
approval, even if he votes against the same or does not participate in the action
of the board, committee, panel or group."

Likewise, Section 7 (a) of RA 6713 provides: "xxx Public officials and
employees shall not, directly or indirectly, have any financial or material interest
in any transaction requiring the approval of their office."

Hence, we are of the view that the transaction entered into by Png. Bgy.
Lim that apparently requires his official act appears to fall within the above
prohibitions.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary
LS:68