Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 37, S. 2008
27 May 2008

DIRECTOR LUIS I. DANAO
DILG Provincial Field Office
Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya

Dear Director Danao:

This refers to your letter-request for a Department Advisory regarding Resolution No. 2008-598 dated 30 April 2008 issued by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Nueva Vizcaya, resolving the boundary dispute between the Municipalities of Aritao and Sta. Fe, Province of Nueva Vizcaya, the last paragraph thereof reads as follows:

"RESOLVED, FURTHER, that this Resolution be forwarded to the DILG Provincial Office for the implementation of the same based on the 1987 Constitution and RA 7160, to the Honorable Governor Luisa Lloren Cuaresma, Honorable Mayor Lucita L. Tan, Honorable Florante S. Gerdan, the respective Sangguniang Bayan of the two municipalities and their counsels, for their information and guidance."

Your query is basically an inquiry as to whether or not the Department, through your office, can implement the said Resolution based on the abovecited paragraph.

Article 17 (h) of the Rules and Regulations Implementing the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) provides in full:

"(h) Decision - Within sixty (60) days from the date the certification was issued, the dispute shall be formally tried and decided by the sangguniang concerned. Copies of the decision shall, within fifteen (15) days from the promulgation thereof, be furnished the parties concerned, DILG, local assessor, Comelec, NSO, and other NGAs concerned."

Parenthetically, Article 19 of the same Implementing Rules and Regulations provides:

"ART. 19. Official Custodian.- The DILG shall be the official custodian of copies of all documents on boundary disputes of LGUs."

It is, therefore, evident from the aforequoted provisions that the DILG's role in decisions rendered by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan pertaining to boundary disputes, would only be that of an official custodian of documents relative to the dispute. Nowhere in the Local Government Code of 1991 or its Implementing Rules and Regulations mandate the Department to implement decisions pertaining to boundary disputes.

Along this line, you are hereby advised to inform the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Nueva Vizcaya of the Department's role on the matter as aforestated and to further inform the said Sangguniang that in implementing its decision, Article 17 (h) of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code requires them to immediately furnish the parties concerned copy of the decision. The parties concerned are immediately furnished copy of the decision so that they may, within the prescriptive period, still exercise available legal remedies, such as an appeal before the Regional Trial Court having jurisdiction over the area in dispute as provided for in Section 119 of the Local Government Code.

In addition, if the period within which to file an appeal has lapsed, i.e. fifteen (15) days from notice of judgment, and no appeal pursuant to Section 119 of the Local Government Code was filed by either party before the concerned Regional Trial Court, the Sangguniang shall accordingly officially furnish the Provincial Assessor, the COMELEC, National Statistics Office, DILG, LMB-DENR and DBM and such other national government agencies concerned, copy of the final decision for the correction of their records under their respective custody.

Please be guided accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Acting Secretary

Legal:87/La
cc: Director Renato L. Brion
DILG Regional Office No. 02
Tuguegarao City