REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Edsa Cor. Mapagmamahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

BLC OPINION NO. 3 S. 2005
January 21, 2005

MS. EVANGELINE L. GAMALONG
Municipal Budget Officer
Burgos, Pangasinan

Dear Ma'am:

This refers to your letter-query seeking for a clarification relative to the
Municipal Budget for CY 2004 of the Municipality of Burgos, Pangasinan,
declaring partially inoperative due to the alleged inclusion in the said budget the grant of
allowance to the Municipal Postmaster starting January 2004. The declaration of
the Sangguniang Panlalawigan caused the suspension of the payment of such
allowance to the Municipal Postmaster.

Hence, this query on the following issues, to wit:
a) Whether or not said suspension of the allowance for the postmaster is
valid?

b) Has the Sangguniang Bayan any liability, legal or otherwise, for
approving the entire budget, thus allowing the Executive Department to
implement the same?

c) What options can the LGU possibly undertake?

At the outset, it is imperative to point out that Section 327(1) of the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) has vested unto the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan the power to review ordinances authorizing annual or supplemental
appropriations of component cities and municipalities in the same manner and
within the same period prescribed for the review of other ordinances.

Corollary thereto, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan is bound to limit its
review of the appropriations ordinance, to the requirements set forth by the
provisions of RA 7160 per Section 327(2) in relation to Section 56(c) thereof, i.e., ultra
vires.

At this juncture, the case of Moday vs. CA (G.R. No. 107916, February 20,
1997) is instructive. In said case, the Supreme Court citing Velazco vs. Blas
ruled that:

"The only ground upon which a provincial board may
declare any municipal resolution, ordinance, or order invalid is
when such resolution, ordinance or order is 'beyond the power
conferred upon the council or president making the same.'
Absolutely no other ground is recognized by the law. A
strictly legal question is before the provincial board in its
consideration of a municipal resolution, ordinance or order.
The provincial (board's) disapproval of any resolution,
ordinance or order must be premised specifically upon the fact
that such resolution, ordinance, or order is outside the scope
of the legal powers conferred by law. If a provincial board
passes these limits, it usurps the legislative functions of the
municipal council, or president. Such has been the consistent
course of executive authority." (emphasis supplied)

Hence, applying the foregoing principles to your case, the ultimate
question to be resolved is, did the Sangguniang Bayan of Burgos, Pangasinan
act beyond the powers conferred upon it, by including in the Municipal budget for
CY 2004 the grant of allowance to the Municipal Postmaster?

Let it be stressed at this juncture that our reply is for purely academic
purposes only. We do not have the power to declare invalid the findings made
by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. May we then invite your attention to Section
447(a)(xi) of RA 7160 which provides for the parameters in the grant of
allowances and other benefits by the municipality. It states that "when the
finance of the municipality allow, the sangguniang bayan, through an
ordinance, may provide for additional allowances and other benefits to
judges, prosecutors, public elementary and high school teachers, and
other national government officials stationed in or assigned to the
municipality." (underscoring ours)

Thus, an allowance may be granted by the municipality, when its finances
allow, to the public officer whose profession or position is enumerated in the
above-cited provision. Note that the position of Municipal Postmaster is not
among those expressly included in the aforesaid enumeration. Can he be
deemed then as falling under the category "other national government official
stationed in or assigned to the municipality"?

There is no exact definition of the term "national government official"
under any law of the Philippines. But the terms "national government" and
"official" are defined. "National government" under the Administrative Code of
the Philippines (EO 292) refers only to the central government, consisting of the
legislative, executive and judicial departments of the government, as
distinguished from local governments and other governmental entities and is not
the

synonymous, therefore, with the terms "The Government of the Republic of
the Philippines" or "Philippine Government", which are expressions broad
enough to include not only the central government but also the provincial and
municipal governments, chartered cities and GOCCs or agencies. (Central Bank
of the Philippines vs. CA, 63 SCRA 431) Official, sometimes used as a synonym
for officer, as distinguished from "clerk" or "employee", refers to those officials
whose duties, not being of a clerical or manual nature, may be considered to
involve the exercise of discretion in the performance of the functions of
government, whether such duties are precisely defined by law or not.
(Ammugunan vs. Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, 60 O.G. 2367)
Hence, a national government official is an official of the central government.