Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

05 January 2007

DIRECTOR QUIRINO M. LIBUNAO
DILG Regional Office No. 10
Cagayan de Oro City

Dear Director Libunao:

This pertains to your letter seeking this level's advice/opinion relative to the legal effects and implications vis-Ã -vis the implementation of the penalty of suspension imposed by the Office of the Deputy Ombudsman for Luzon against Mayor Jose M. Galario, Jr. of Valencia City.

You stated that in an Order dated 15 April 2005, then Ombudsman Simeon V. Marcelo found Mayor Galario administratively guilty as charged and thereby imposed upon him the penalty of suspension for three (3) months without pay. Mayor Galario then filed a Motion for Reconsideration and on 13 March 2006, an Order was issued by the Office of the Ombudsman denying the same. Complainant then filed before the Ombudsman a Motion for Execution of Judgment.

Accordingly, on 12 October 2006, Ombudsman Merceditas M. Gutierrez issued an Order directing you to immediately implement the Order of the Ombudsman suspending Mayor Galario for three months without pay. On 23 October 2006, Atty. Rodolfo M. Elman, OIC, Office of the Deputy Ombudsman for Mindanao, indorsed to you the Ombudsman Order for immediate implementation.

When you were about to implement the same, the Court of Appeals, Special 21st Division, in a Petition filed by Mayor Galario, entitled: "Jose M. Galario, Jr. vs. The Honorable Office of the Ombudsman and Ruth P. Piano", docketed as CA-G.R. SP No. 01278-MIN, issued on 23 October 2006 a 60-day Temporary Restraining Order, directing the Ombudsman or any of its agents to refrain from implementing the 11 April 2005 and 13 March 2006 Orders of the Ombudsman. On 28 December 2006, citing that the TRO has already expired, complainant again requested you to implement the same.

You then sought clarification from the Ombudsman for Mindanao as to whether or not the suspension order can be reimplemented in view of the expiration of the TRO and in a letter dated 02 January 2007, Honorable Humprey T. Monteroso, Deputy Ombudsman for Mindanao, wrote you and opined that there is no reason for the delay of implementing the Ombudsman Order of suspension against Mayor Galario, the reason being that the TRO has already expired and the court did not issue a preliminary injunction, hence, upon the TRO's expiration, the same is deemed automatically vacated per Section 5, Rule 58 of the Rules of Court.

On 03 January 2007, you accordingly served the suspension order of Mayor Galario and pursuant to Section 46 (a) of the Local Government Code, he likewise required Vice Mayor Benjamin A. Verano to take his oath of office as Acting City Mayor for a period of three (3) months. However, the oath taking did not materialize for the reason that Vice Mayor Verano took a leave of absence. You then asked the highest ranking Sangguniang Panlungsod Member, in the person of SP Member Helen P. Bernal, to now exercise the powers and functions as Acting City Vice Mayor and consequently act as OIC, Office of the Acting City Mayor, for three (3) days in the absence of the Vice Mayor who is on leave;

On 04 January 2007, Vice Mayor Verano called and told you that he is no longer taking his oath of office as Acting City Mayor and will not also vacate the Office of the Vice Mayor. You likewise reported that Mayor Galario wrote you, saying that he will not step down as he will avail all legal remedies under the law.

Hence, your following queries which we shall quote in toto:

1. "Will the 1st ranking Sangguniang Panlungsod Member, Helen P. Bernal fill up the position of the Office of the City Mayor applying the law of succession in view of the refusal of City Vice Mayor Benjamin A. Verano to assume the temporarily vacant Office of the Mayor?

2. Considering that City Vice Mayor Benjamin Verano refuses to assume the position as Acting City Mayor, will the rule on succession still apply from the 1st ranking Sangguniang Panlungsod Member down the line?

3. What are the possible actions that our level could take against City Mayor Galario and City Vice Mayor Verano who up to this writing refuse to vacate their respective positions?"

In reply to your 1st and 2nd queries, may we invite your attention to Section 44 (a) of the Local Government Code, which provides that "(a) If a permanent vacancy occurs in the office of the governor or mayor, the vice governor or vice mayor concerned shall become the governor or mayor. If a permanent vacancy occurs in the offices of the governor, vice governor, mayor, or vice mayor, the highest ranking sanggunian member or, in case of his permanent inability, the second highest ranking sanggunian member shall become the governor, vice governor, mayor or vice mayor, as the case may be.