INTERIOR

AND

LOCAL

Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

MR. LEONCIO T. UY III

ALS OPINION NG 5 S. 2006

07 February 2006

Sogod, Southern Leyte

Dear Mr. Uy:

This pertains to your letter requesting for legal opinion regarding the manner of appointing the replacement for the vacant position in the Sangguniang Bayan of Sogod, Southern Leyte,

In your letter, you stated that your father was admitted as Member of the Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino (LDP). He then ran for public office and was elected as Sangguniang Bayan Member of Sogod, Southern Leyte, in the May 2004 elections. On 27 July 2004, your father died. You further stated that at the time of his death, he was still a member of good standing of the LDP party. On 17 October 2005, your brother was nominated by the LDP Party to fill up the vacancy in the Sangguniang Bayan in accordance with Section 45 of RA 7160. You now posed the following queries:

1. Whether or not the Provincial Governor, as the appointing authority, has the discretion to refuse to appoint the party nominee to the office who has all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications.

2. Whether or not the Provincial Governor has the discretion to appoint a person other than the party nominee.

3. What are the legal consequences and/or remedies available to the nominee in case the Provincial Governor unduly refuses to appoint the former.

In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to Section 45 (a) and (b) of the Local Government Code, which provides that:

"SEC. 45. Permanent Vacancy in the Sanggunian.. (a) Permanent vacancies in the sanggunian where automatic succession provided above do not apply shall be filled by appointment in the following manner:

1. the President, through the Executive Secretary, in the case of the sangguniang panlalawigan and the sangguniang panlungsod of highly urbanized cities and independent component cities;