Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 14. S. 2005
14 February 2005

MR. JOSE R. DE CASTRO, SR.
Sangguniang Panlalawigan Secretary
Provincial Capitol Building
Trece Martires City, Cavite

Dear Mr. De Castro:

This refers to your letter, requesting for this Department's legal
opinion on your herein quoted queries, viz:

1. "Should the Vice-Governor in his capacity as Presiding
Officer of the local sangguniang upon relinquishing the
chair, has the right to participate in a deliberation? If yes,
up to what extent? If no, please cite provision of the
existing law with clarificatory statement.

2. Should he (the Vice Governor/Presiding Officer) be allowed
to stay in the premises upon relinquishing his chair? Please
state legal basis with expanded explanation."

Please be informed that the Internal Rules of Procedure of the
sangguniang is primarily governed by the following sources of parliamentary
rules, arranged in that order (hierarchy), thus: the 1987 Constitution; the
Local Government Code; Judicial Decisions; Adopted Internal Rules; the
Parliamentary Practice; Parliamentary Authors; and Customs and Usages.

Hence, in connection now with your first query, we shall first examine
the 1987 Constitution. We note that while there are Parliamentary Rules
provided therein, the same were, however, made applicable only to
Congress and which cannot be applied to sanggunians.

Accordingly, descending now to the Local Government Code, we
note that Parliamentary Procedures and Rules are available from Section 48
up to Section 59 of the Local Government Code. Thus, with respect to
the Presiding Officership, Section 49 provides for the powers and limitations of
the Presiding Officer. Section 50, on the other hand, provides for the
organization of the committees, including the power of the sangguniang to
adopt such other rules as they deem fit, provided, however, that it is
consistent with law and judicial decisions. It is well to note that Sections 49
and 50 of the same Code did not contain any provision expressly
prohibiting or allowing a Presiding Officer, to relinquish his chair and
participate in the deliberation. Stated differently, the Local Government
Code is silent on this matter.

Descending further to judicial decisions, presently, we have yet to
come across a Supreme Court ruling dwelling on the same issue.
Accordingly, it would be inevitable for us to now descend further to your
Presiding Internal Rules. In this regard, if the Adopted Internal Rules allow
the Presiding Officer to relinquish his chair and participate in the
deliberation, then that Adopted Internal Rules should be observed. If, on
the other hand, the Adopted Internal Rules prohibits the Presiding Officer
to relinquish his chair and participate in the deliberation, then that should
be followed. However, if the Adopted Internal Rules is silent on the matter,
then the inevitable consequence is for you to descend further to
Parliamentary Practice. Under well-settled principles in Parliamentary
Practice, the Presiding Officer is allowed to relinquish his chair and may
even be allowed to participate in the deliberation, provided, however, that
upon the termination of the deliberation, the Presiding Officer shall then
reassume the chair for the purpose of the taking of the vote on that
particular matter to be voted upon.

With regard to your second query, as elucidated above, your query
can be best addressed by your Adopted Internal Rules. However, in the
absence thereof, then the Parliamentary practice can be applied whereby
the Presiding Officer may be allowed to stay in the premises until such time
that he shall reassume his Presiding Officership once the body will now take
the voting.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,
ANGEL0 T. REYES
Secretary

Legal:43/La
cc:
Director Leonilo B. Lariosa
DILG Region IV-A
Calderon Bldg., EDSA
Diliman, Quezon City