REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
07 March 2008

PUNONG BARANGAY RICHARD DADIVAS, et al.
Barangay Tincupón, Panitan
Capiz

Dear PB Dadivas:

This has reference to your Petition to declare null and void the Order of the Board of Election Supervisors (BES) declaring "failure of elections" the Municipal Liga Elections in Panitan, Capiz, held on 11 December 2007. Although said Petition is actually intended to the National Liga Executive Board as embodied in paragraph 1 thereof, it should not prevent us from commenting on the issues raised therein, viz:

1. Whether the assumption of PB Ignacio Deocampo as the Presiding Officer during the 04 December 2007 Liga meeting for the formation of the different committees for the 11 December 2007 Liga Chapter elections and during the Liga Municipal Chapter elections was proper?

2. Whether or not BES' declaration of failure of elections due to lack of quorum was proper?

3. Whether or not PB Ignacio Deocampo as the Temporary Liga President can assume the office in the Sangguniang Bayan as ex-officio member?

You averred in your Petition that former incumbent Liga Chapter President of Panitan, Capiz, opted not to run in the 2007 barangay elections. Further, the incumbent Board of Directors of the Liga in said chapter had chosen PB Deocampo (former Liga Secretary) to temporarily act as Liga President.

- 2 -

Before delving on the first and third issues, let us first cite the pertinent provision of the Constitution and By Laws of the Liga ng mga Barangay sa Pilipinas, to wit:

"SEC. 1. Term and Tenure of Office.- The term of all officers and members of the Board of Directors of the LIGA at all levels including the National Liga shall be from the date of their elections until their successors have been elected and qualified, unless sooner removed from office for a cause. The term of the Liga Officers shall be understood strictly to be concurrent with the term and tenure of office of the Sangguniang Barangay. No stipulation in any form shall prejudice such term and tenure of office of such Liga officers.

In cases where the elected successor fails to qualify due to certain legal impediments such as the issuance of a restraining order by a competent court; fails or refuses to assume his office for whatever reason and other kinds of legal impediments, the incumbent Liga chapter President shall continue to represent the Liga in the Sangguniang concerned capacity, until his successor is finally legally assume his/her position. However, if the incumbent Liga chapter President does not get reelected as Punong Barangay, the incumbent Vice President shall represent the Liga in the Sangguniang concerned.

In the event the incumbent Vice President also fails to get re-elected, the remaining incumbent officers and members of the board of the chapter concerned shall elect from among themselves their representative to the local sangguniang. In case of failure to elect among themselves, the National Liga shall appoint a caretaker of the chapter concerned with the designation of acting President.

In the case of multiple vacancies in the National Executive Board which results in ‘no quorum’, the Board shall be filled up, only to constitute the needed quorum, by the remaining incumbent who is the most senior through appointment. The Board with the new appointees shall merely be interim and function until