Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

February 28, 2007

MAYOR RUPERTO M. MARTINEZ
Infanta, Pangasinan

Dear Mayor Martinez:

This pertains to your letter seeking this Department’s legal opinion on whether or not the Sangguniang Bayan can question the municipal development plan formulated by the Municipal Development Council (MDC) and remand the same to the MDC for clarification after its chairman failed to answer issues raised during the deliberation thereof.

In reply to your query, please be informed that by statutory mandate, the formulation and initiation of the municipality’s development plan is the primary function of the Municipal Development Council and the same has to be submitted to the Sangguniang Bayan for its appropriate action and approval pursuant to Section 109(a) in relation to Section 114(a) of the Local Government Code of 1991.

Such submission and approval are only for purposes of the enactment by the Sangguniang of the corresponding ordinance providing for legislative authorization of the budget for the proposed development projects consistent with the fundamental principle that no money shall be paid out of the local treasury except in pursuance of an appropriations ordinance (Section 305(a), Ibid).

It must however be emphasized that although the Sangguniang Bayan is authorized by the Code to approve such municipal development plan formulated by the MDC only for the purpose as stated, such authority does not include the power to modify, revise or alter the same, albeit, the Sangguniang Bayan is not precluded from raising questions thereon for purposes of clarification.

In our DILG Opinion No. 46, Series of 2002 dated March 18, 2002, we had the occasion to opine that, precisely, if the Sangguniang Bayan is not amenable to the MDC’s approved projects and programs, the said sangguniang should instead return it to the MDC with its comments and recommendations for LDC’s proper consideration.

Thus, in this particular case, the passage of Resolution No. 18, S. 2006 (Exhibit "B"), remanding the Municipal Development Plan (MDC Resolution No. 8, Series of 2005) for the purpose of clarification only, to our mind, is proper and in order.

As to your corollary query on whether or not there is appeal or any plain, speedy and adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law available for the local chief executive to implement the development plans, we answer in the negative. Indeed, there is as yet no appeal or remedy would be premature unless and until the MDC re-submits the Municipal Development Plan to the Sangguniang Bayan with the desired clarification of the issues raised and the Sangguniang Bayan refuses to take appropriate action thereon or would actually introduce any modification, revision or alteration thereon which are proscribed under the Local Government Code of 1991.

Hypothetically, therefore, in the event that the MDC has already re-submitted the Municipal Development Plan with the corresponding clarifications as required by the Sangguniang and the latter would still refuse to act on it and approve the same or would even introduce modifications thereon, then the local chief executive shall have the cause of action to file a special civil action for mandamus in court under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court against the Sangguniang Bayan to compel the latter to enact the corresponding ordinance providing for legislative authorization of the budget for the proposed development projects grounded upon the statutory mandate of Section 109 (a) and Section 114 (a) in relation to Section 305 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991, as discussed above. The filing of the civil case is without prejudice to the filing of an administrative case against the members of the sangguniang bayan for their unjustifiable refusal to approve the Municipal Development Plan before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan or the Ombudsman for conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the local government or for unprofessional conduct, as may be warranted by the circumstances, under RA 6713 otherwise known as Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards of Public Officials and Employees.

We hope that we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

CC: DIR. MANUEL V. BIASON
DILG, Region I
Aguila Road, City of San Fernando

Legal:72/Merle