Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG OPINION NO. 25, S. 2008

15 April 2008

MR. ALEX S. LAGTAPON
Barangay 4, Hinigiran
Negros Occidental

Dear Mr. Lagtapon:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on whether or not succession as provided under the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) is applicable in case the elected Punong Barangay died before taking his oath and assume the functions of his office.

At the outset, please be informed that the rule on succession is embodied under Sections 44 and 46 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) pertaining to the manner of filling-up of permanent vacancies in the Offices of the Governor, Vice-Governor, Mayor and Vice-Mayor and on temporary vacancy in the office of the local chief executive, respectively, and not Section 64 as erroneously stated in your letter.

Nevertheless, in reply to your query, we answer in the affirmative. Allow us to illustrate how we arrived to this conclusion.

Well-settled is the rule that a person acquires public office either by appointment or by election. An appointment is the act or designation by the executive officer, board or body to where that power has been delegated, of the individual who is to exercise the functions of a given office (Mechem, Section 102). On the other hand, an election "means the choice or selection of candidates to public office by popular vote through the use of the ballot, and the elected officials are determined through the will of the electorate. An election is the embodiment of the popular will, the expression of the sovereign power of the people. The winner is the candidate who has obtained a majority or plurality of valid votes cast in the election" (Rulloda vs. COMELEC, G.R. No. 154198, January 20, 2003).

As you represented, the Punong Barangay was duly elected as such. His election to said position would therefore mean that he acquired a plurality of the votes lawfully cast in his barangay. "The fact of having a plurality of votes lawfully cast is what confers the title to the office, xxx" (Mechem, note 2 at 130, cited in De Leon, H. Jr. Law on Public Offices and Election Law, 1990 Edition, p. 374).

Subsequent to one’s election to office and before entering upon the performance of his duties, the person so elected is usually required by law to do some acts by which he shall signify his acceptance of the office and his undertaking to execute the trust confided in him. Section 92 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) provides and we quote:

"SECTION 92. Oath. – (a) All elective and appointive local officials and employees shall, upon assumption to office, subscribe to an oath or affirmation of office in the prescribed form. xxx"

Such act wherein the person elected shall signify his acceptance of the office and his undertaking to execute the trust confided in him is ordinarily termed qualification. It generally consists of the taking, and often of subscribing and filing of an official oath. Accordingly, failure to take an oath and assume the powers, duties and functions of the office would result to a failure to qualify, which, in turn, is one of the grounds enumerated under Section 44 of the Local Government Code that would render an office permanently vacant. Said provision provides and we quote:

"Section 44. Permanent Vacancies in the Offices of the Governor, Vice-Governor, Mayor, and Vice-Mayor. – xxx xxx

(b) If a permanent vacancy occurs in the office of the punong barangay, the highest ranking sangguniang barangay member or, in case of his permanent inability, the second highest ranking sangguniang member, shall become the punong barangay.

xxx xxx xxx

(d) The successors as defined herein shall serve only the unexpired terms of their predecessors.

For purposes of this Chapter, a permanent vacancy arises when an elective local official fills a higher vacant office, refuses to assume office, fails to qualify, dies, is removed from office, voluntarily resigns, or is otherwise permanently incapacitated to discharge the functions of his office.

For purposes of succession as provided in this Chapter, ranking in the sangguniang shall be determined on the basis of the proportion of votes obtained by each winning candidate to the total number of registered voters in each district in the immediately preceding local election." (Emphasis Supplied)

Applying the foregoing to your case, by reason of his death, the elected Punong Barangay can no longer assume and take his oath of office. His failure to assume and take his oath of office, as mentioned above, result to his failure to qualify to the office of the Punong Barangay. Since there is failure to qualify on his part, this would thereafter render his position permanently vacant and there being a permanent vacancy in the office of the Punong Barangay, the rule on succession as provided under the aforesaid Section 44 (b), supra, is therefore applicable. Based on the aforementioned provision, in case of permanent vacancy in the office of the