Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DIRECTOR SIXTO B. AQUINO
DILG Pangasinan Provincial Office
Lingayen, Pangasinan

Dear Dir. Aquino:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking our clarification on the proper application of the three-consecutive term limit rule. You specifically asked the following queries, which we hereunder quote in toto:

"(1) Whether or not a penalty of suspension for almost 12 months in an administrative case (i.e. 4 months for each of the three counts of the charges), be considered as involuntary renunciation of the office of the Punong Barangay and has the effect of interrupting the continuity of serving the full term for purposes of applying the 3 term limit.

(2) Whether or not a Punong Barangay who was first elected in the 1994 Barangay Elections but deemed resigned upon filing of his candidacy for Mayor in 1995, reelected in 1997 and again reelected in 2002 elections, could still file his candidacy for the same position in the October 29, 2007 elections?

(3) A Barangay Kaguward was elected and served as such for the term 1994-1997. Re-elected in 1997 brgy. Elections, he served as Brgy. Kaguward from 1997-2001 but on the last year of his second term or in the later half of 2001 up to the end of his term in 2002, he served as PB by succession. In the third term he again ran as Brgy. Kaguward, won and served the full term.

ISSUE: Will his succession to the vacant position of Punong Brgy. An interruption of the continuity of service as Brgy. Kaguward? Can he still run as Brgy. Kaguward in October 29, 2007 Brgy. Elections?"

Before dealing squarely with your queries, we deem it proper to give some discussions on the pertinent provisions of law applicable in the case at hand.

-Section 8, Art. X of the 1987 Constitution

"SEC. 8. The term of office of elective local officials, except barangay officials, which shall be determined by law, shall be three years and no such official shall serve for more than three consecutive terms. Voluntary renunciation of the office for any length of time shall not be considered as an interruption in the continuity of his service for the full term for which he was elected."

-Section 43 (b) of the Local Government Code

"SEC. 43. Term of office.- (b) No local elective official shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive terms in the same position. Voluntary renunciation of the office for any length of time shall not be considered as an interruption in the continuity of service for the full term for which the elective official concerned was elected. xxx"

The foregoing provisions are the bases for the so-called three consecutive term limit rule among local elective officials, which disqualifies them from running for the same position after serving the same for three consecutive terms.

In the leading case of Borja vs. COMELEC (G.R. No. 133495, 03 September 1998) and in several cases decided thereafter up to the present, the Supreme Court consistently ruled that for Section 43 (b) to apply, two (2) elements must concur, which are: (1) the local official concerned must have been elected to that office; and (2) said local official must have fully served the term of same office for three consecutive terms. If these circumstances are present, then the concerned local official is already disqualified to run for the same position on his supposed fourth consecutive term.

Hence, in reply to your first and second queries, may we quote hereunder portion of the Supreme Court pronouncement in the same case of Benjamin U. Borja, Jr. vs. COMELEC et al. (G.R. No. 133495, 03 September 1998), as follows:

"To recapitulate, the term limit for elective local officials must be taken to refer to the right to be elected as well as the right to serve in the same elective position. Consequently, it is not enough that an individual has served three consecutive terms in an elective local office, he must also have been elected to the same position for the same number of times before the disqualification can apply. This point can be made clearer by considering the following cases or situations:

Case No. 1. Suppose A is a vice-mayor who becomes mayor by reason of the death of the incumbent.