Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

HON. JORGE M. RAMOS
Sangguniang Panlalawigan Member
Provincial Capitol Building
Romblon, Romblon

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your Resolution cum query, requesting for this
Department's legal opinion on whether or not Section 323 of RA 7160 (The
Local Government Code) is applicable on the following set of facts:

• On 18 October 2005, the proposed Annual Budget for the
Province of Romblon was submitted by the Governor to the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan;

• Upon receipt, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan promptly noted
that the submitted Annual Budget was defective and forthwith
returned the same to the Governor with its observations;

• Meantime that the proposed Annual Budget was with the
Governor, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan conducted its
regular weekly sessions and tackled other business during
those sessions;

• It was at this point that Sangguniang Panlalawigan Member
Benjamin Irao claimed that the proceedings of the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan were illegal inasmuch as the
Annual Budget of the province has not been approved, as
provided for under Section 323 of the Local Government
Code.

Hence, this query.

The contention is untenable. The disputed section reads:

"SEC. 323. Failure to Enact the Annual
Appropriations.- In case the sangguniang concerned fails to
pass the ordinance authorizing the annual appropriations at

the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, it shall continue to
hold sessions, without additional remuneration for its
members, until such ordinance is approved, and no other
business may be taken up during such sessions. If the
sangguniang still fails to enact such ordinance after ninety

(90) days from the beginning of the fiscal year, the ordinance
authorizing the appropriations of the preceding year shall be
deemed reenacted and shall remain in force and effect until
the ordinance authorizing the proposed appropriations is
passed by the sangguniang concerned. However, only the
annual appropriations for salaries and wages of existing
positions, statutory and contractual obligations, and
essential operating expenses authorized in the annual and
supplemental budgets for the preceding year shall be deemed
reenacted and disbursement of funds shall be in accordance
therewith."

While not so expressly stated, the foregoing section applies only if the proposed budget is already with the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for consideration, deliberation and approval as the annual appropriation ordinance. It does not apply, as in this case, when the proposed budget is returned back to the Governor as there is virtually nothing left for the Sangguniang to consider. The rationale for this is that this section is part and parcel of a cluster of sections which deals with the procedure in the enactment of local government budgets. Section 318, 2nd paragraph, and Section 319,
both of the Local Government Code, provide:

"SEC. 318. Preparation of the Budget by the Local
Chief Executive.- xxx The local chief executive shall submit
the executive budget to the sanggunian concerned not later
than the sixteenth (16th) of October of the current fiscal year.
xxx"

"SEC. 319. Legislative Authorization of the Budget.-
On or before the end of the current fiscal year, the
sangguniang concerned shall enact, through an ordinance,
the annual budget of the local government unit for the
ensuing fiscal year on the basis of the estimates of income
and expenditures submitted by the local chief executive."

Clearly, the submission of the executive budget to the Sangguni
is what sets in motion the participation of the Sangguni in the said budget as exemplified under Sections 318 and 319 of the Local Government Code. Its return back to the Governor clearly abated the prospective application of Section 323 of the same Code.

Whether the procedure taken by the Sangguni- that of returning the
executive budget or, also known as the budget proposal to the Governor - is
sound or not is beyond our authority to inquire as the same would necessarily
involve the exercise of adjudicative powers which is vested only unto the
regular courts. What is important, however, is that its return to the Governor
precluded the application of Section 323 of the Code.

It is axiomatic to note that Section 323 of the Local Government Code
only applies in case the Sangguniang Panlalawigan fails to pass the ordinance
authorizing the annual appropriations at the beginning of the ensuing fiscal
year such that from that time, the Sangguniang is mandated to conduct sessions
and no other business shall be tackled except the annual budget. Along this
line, it is recalled here that SP Member Irao branded as illegal those sessions
held subsequent to 18 October 2005, date of actual submission of the 2006