Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
DILG OPINION NO. 8 S. 2005
28 January 2005
BARANGAY KAGAWAD PABLO T. OLDAN
Barangay Mayamot, Antipolo City
Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the following issues, to wit:

1. "What constitutes a quorum of sangguniang barangay in regular meeting or session?

2. Whether or not a barangay captain can hold or chair committees normally given to barangay kagawads.

3. Whether or not the act of the barangay captain in appointing the members of his family up to the fourth civil degree by consanguinity as barangay clerk or utility is legal.

4. Whether or not the optional appointments of barangay police volunteers by the barangay captain are valid without consultation from the barangay kagawads."

In reply to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 53 of the Local Government Code of 1991, which provides that "A majority of all the members of the sangguniang who have been elected and qualified shall constitute a quorum to transact official business xxx".

In the light of the Supreme Court ruling in the case of "Santiago vs. Guingona, et al." (G.R. No. 134577, 18 November 1998), which could be a guiding principle in determining quorum, the term "majority" has been judicially defined as the number greater than half or more than half of any total.

Moreover, it may be noted that the determination of a majority to constitute a quorum may come in two (2) ways, i.e. (1) that which is fifty percent (50%) plus one of the entire membership, or (2) that which is simply more than one half (1/2) of the entire membership. Either way, however, would give us the same result.

Thus, in applying the abovecited provisions and discussion, in a sanggunian composed of nine (9) members, including the punong barangay, the number of majority constituting a quorum is five (5). This mathematical solution is arrived at considering the fact that the quotient of nine (9) divided by two (2) is 4.5. Following the first formula, 4.5+1 is equal to 5.5. However, a fraction cannot be considered as one whole vote, since it is physically and legally impossible to divide a person or even his vote into a fractional part. Accordingly, you may have to go down to the next whole number, which is 5. On the other hand, even if we follow the second formula, we will still get the same result. Note that 4.5 is more than half of 9. In this regard, 5 is more than 4.5 and, therefore, more than one half.

Anent your second query, please be informed that the organization of committees in the sanggunian is primarily governed by the following sources of parliamentary rules, arranged in that order (hierarchy), thus: the 1987 Constitution; the Local Government Code; Judicial Decisions; Adopted Internal Rules; the Parliamentary Practice; Parliamentary Authors; and Customs and Usages.

Hence, in connection now with your second query, we shall first examine the 1987 Constitution. We note that while there are Parliamentary Rules provided therein, the same were, however, made applicable only to Congress and which cannot be applied to sanggunians.

Descending now to the Local Government Code, we note that Parliamentary Procedures and Rules are available from Section 48 up to Section 59 of the Local Government Code. Thus, with respect to Presiding Officership, Section 49 provides for the powers and limitations of the Presiding Officer. With respect to organization of committees, Section 50 provides for the manner by which committee chairmanship and membership are to be determined and selected. It is well to note that Sections 49 and 50 of the same Code did not contain any provision expressly prohibiting or allowing a Presiding Officer, in your case the Punong Barangay, to hold or chair committees normally given to sanggunian members. Stated differently, the Local Government Code is silent on this matter.

Descending further to judicial decisions, presently, we have yet to come across a Supreme Court ruling dwelling on the same issue. Accordingly, it would be inevitable for us to now descend further to your Adopted Internal Rules. In this regard, if the Adopted Internal Rules allow the Presiding Officer to hold or chair committees in the sanggunian, then that Adopted Internal Rules which you adopted should be respected and given effect. If, on the other hand, the Adopted Internal Rules prohibits the Presiding Officer to hold or chair any committee, then again, that should be followed. However, if the Adopted Internal Rules is silent on the matter, then again, the inevitable consequence is for you to descend further to Parliamentary Practice.

Under Parliamentary Practice, the Presiding Officer is not allowed to hold or chair a committee except Ad Hoc or Special Committees created for special purpose not otherwise provided in the regular committees.