REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magapagal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City
02 July 2007

MR. PACIFICO C. VELASCO
Barangay No. 3, San Andres
Bacarra, Ilocos Norte

Dear Mr. Velasco:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on
whether or not you, being the second placer in the mayoralty race in
the recently concluded May 14, 2007 synchronized national and local elections
in that municipality, may assume as Mayor in view of the untimely death of
Mayor-elect Philip C. Velasco a few days only after his proclamation
without, however, having taken his oath of office yet.

In your letter, you represented that in the May 14, 2007 synchronized
national and local elections, Mr. Villamor E. Ramelb, Mr. Philip C. Velasco
and you were rival candidates for the mayoralty position in the Municipality
of Bacarra. Mr. Philip C. Velasco was the one proclaimed winner by the
COMELEC on 16 May 2007, while you, on the other hand, placed second as
evidenced by a Certification issued by the Election Officer of the COMELEC
in Bacarra. On 20 May 2007, during the coronation night of the Farmers
Festival, Mayor-elect Philip C. Velasco and the elected First Ranking
Sangguniang Bayan Member, Mr. Marcelo P. Andaya, were shot to death by
unknown assassin. In view of the foregoing, the following are your
positions, to wit:

1. Since Mayor-elect Philip C. Velasco died before he has
taken his oath of office, you, as the second-placer, could
instead assume as Mayor; or

2. The untimely death of Mayor-elect Philip C. Velasco
rendered the position of mayor vacant and that a special
election shall be necessary in order to fill up said
position.

Vice-Mayor-elect Nicomedes dela Cruz will take his oath of
office as vice-mayor (the position he was voted for) on 30
June 2007 and he would assume only as acting mayor
starting 01 July 2007 while waiting for the order of the
COMELEC to conduct a special election for the position of
mayor of Bacarra.

Well-settled is the rule that a person acquires public office either by
appointment or by election. An appointment is the act or designation by
the executive officer, board or body to where that power has been
delegated, of the individual who is to exercise the functions of a given
office (Mechem, Section 102). On the other hand, an election "means the
choice or selection of candidates to public office by popular vote through the use
of the ballot, and the elected officials are determined through the will of the
electorate. An election is the embodiment of the popular will, the expression of
the sovereign power of the people. The winner is the candidate who has
obtained a majority or plurality of valid votes cast in the election" (Rulleda vs.
COMELEC, G.R. No. 154198, January 20, 2003).

As you represented, Mayor-elect Philip C. Velasco was already
proclaimed winner by the Municipal Board of Canvassers before he was
shot to death on the evening of May 20, 2007. Such proclamation would
only mean that he acquired a plurality of the votes lawfully cast sufficient
to elect him to said position. "The fact of having a plurality of votes lawfully
cast is what confers the title to the office, xxx" (Mechem, note 2 at 130, cited
in De Leon, H. Jr. Law on Public Offices and Election Law, 1990 Edition, p.
374).

Subsequent to one’s election to office and before entering upon the
performance of his duties, the person so elected is usually required by law
to do some acts by which he shall signify his acceptance of the office and
his undertaking to execute the trust confided in him. Section 92 of the
Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) provides and we quote:

"SECTION 92. Oath. – (a) All elective and appointive local
officials and employees shall, upon assumption to office, subscribe
to an oath or affirmation of office in the prescribed form. xxx"

Such act wherein the person elected shall signify his acceptance of
the office and his undertaking to execute the trust confided in him is
ordinarily termed qualification. It generally consists of the taking, and