REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magapagal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
31 July 2007

DIRECTOR QUIRINO M. LIBUNAO
DILG Regional Office No. 10
Cagayan de Oro City

Dear Dir. Libunao:

This refers to your earlier referral for legal opinion regarding the issue on sectoral representative for the indigenous people in the Sanggunian Panlungsod of Gingoog City. You raised the following issues, to wit:

1. "Is Republic Act No. 8371 the enabling law for the creation of the position of sectoral representative for the indigenous people in the Sanggunian Panlungsod of Gingoog City?

2. Is City Ordinance No. 2007-174 valid?"

As borne by the records you submitted to us, the Sanggunian Panlungsod of Gingoog City came up with City Ordinance No. 2007-174 creating the position of sectoral representative for the indigenous people in the Sanggunian Panlungsod of Gingoog City and in relation thereto, providing for the salaries, allowances and other emoluments for said position in the annual budget of Gingoog City starting Calendar Year 2007. The said ordinance likewise recognized Datu Salagaan/Allan Mandokita as the representative of the indigenous people to the Sanggunian Panlungsod of Gingoog City pursuant to the provisions of law and DILG Opinion No. 46, s. 2005.

The said ordinance was then submitted to the Mayor for approval but the Mayor returned the same to the Sanggunian Panlungsod without action. Applying Section 44 (b) of RA 7160, the Secretary to the Sanggunian Panlungsod issued a Certification that said city ordinance is deemed approved there being no action taken by the Mayor within ten (10) days from its submission to the Office of the Mayor.

In reply thereto, we ought to answer first your second issue as to whether or not City Ordinance No. 2007-174 is valid.

In this regard, it bears to note that under our settled jurisprudence, an ordinance enjoys the presumption of validity. Considering that City Ordinance No. 2007-174 had already gone through the substantive and procedural process for its passage and approval as mandated under the Local Government Code, said ordinance now enjoys the presumption of validity and thus is presumed valid unless later judicially invalidated by a court of justice.

With regard to your first issue, may we first lay down the provisions under RA 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code, in relation to RA 8371, otherwise known as "The Indigenous People's Rights Act of 1997" with regard to the sectoral representations in all Sanggunian at all levels. To start with, Section 41 (b) and (c) of RA 7160 provides:

"(b) The regular members of the sanggunian panlalawigan, sanggunian panlungsod, and sangguniang bayan shall be elected by district, as may be provided for by law. Sanggunian barangay members shall be elected at large. The presidents of the leagues of sanggunian members of component cities and municipalities shall serve as ex-officio members of the sanggunian panlalawigan concerned. The presidents of the liga ng mga barangay and the pederasyon ng mga sangguniang kabataan elected by their respective chapters, as provided in this Code, shall serve as ex-officio members of the sanggunian panlalawigan, sanggunian panlungsod, and sangguniang bayan.
(c) In addition thereto, there shall be one (1) sectoral representative from the women, one (1) from the
following sectors: the urban poor, indigenous cultural communities, disabled persons, or any other sector as may be determined by the sanggunian concerned within ninety (90) days prior to the holding of the next local elections, as may be provided for by law. The COMELEC shall promulgate regulations to effectively provide for the election of such sectoral representatives."