Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

14 May 2008

MR. ARTEMIO O. AMON
Sangguniang Bayan Member
Office of the Sangguniang Bayan
Bani, Pangasinan

Dear SB Member Amon:

This has reference to your letter dated 15 April 2008 seeking for our
clarification on the following issues, to wit:

1) Whether or not the continuous absence of Punong Barangay Marcelino T. Tugas in his alleged attempt to evade
arrest for the crime of Robbery with Homicide in Band with no bail recommended, can already be considered as a permanent
inability on his part to discharge the powers and functions of his
office thus giving rise to a permanent vacancy in that office;

2) If the answer to above question is in the positive,
whether or not Godrey B. Rebuyon, the highest ranking
sangguniang barangay member, can immediately take his oath
and permanently assume the position as Punong Barangay of
Garrita, Bani, Pangasinan?

Per your letter, you represented that on 27 November 2007, Punong
Barangay Marcelino T. Tugas of Barangay Garrita, Bani, Pangasinan was
charged, together with other persons, for the crime of Robbery with
Homicide in Band with no bail recommended. On 18 December 2007, a
warrant for his arrest was issued by RTC Branch 54 in Alaminos City, that
Province. PB Tugas then went into hiding but has filed surreptitiously his
leave from 18 December 2007 until 31 March 2008. On 14 January 2008,
Godrey B. Rebuyon, the highest-ranking sangguniang barangay member,
assumed the position as Punong Barangay in a temporary capacity.
Notwithstanding the expiration of his leave on 31 March 2008, PB Tugas did
not report to his office thus incurred and still incurring absence without
official leave (AWOL) up to the date of your letter. Hence, your queries.

In reply to your first query, we answer in the negative. Please be
informed that until such time when PB Tugas is proven guilty beyond
reasonable doubt via a conviction by final judgment for the crime of
Robbery with Homicide in Band, he is presumed innocent for such crime.

And until such time when he is permanently separated from office for any
of the grounds set forth by law and after an administrative case was filed
against him and hearings conducted in accordance with pertinent law,
rules and regulations, he remains to be the Punong Barangay of Garrita. In
this regard, Section 46 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160)
provides and we quote:

"SECTION 46. Temporary Vacancy in the Office of
the Local Chief Executive.—(a) When the governor, city
or municipal mayor, or punong barangay is temporarily
incapacitated to perform his duties for physical or legal
reasons such as, but not limited to, leave of absence,
travel abroad, and suspension from office, the vice-
governor, city or municipal vice-mayor, or the highest
ranking sangguniang bayan member shall
automatically exercise the powers and perform the
duties and functions of the local chief executive
concerned, except the power to appoint, suspend, or
dismiss employees which can only be exercised if the
period of temporary incapacity exceeds thirty (30)
working days."

Thus, the continued physical absence of Punong Barangay Tugas
while in hiding will just give rise to a temporary incapacity for his failure to
perform his duties and functions as Punong Barangay due to physical
reasons, which is precisely his absence. Applying the same section, this
temporary incapacity of Punong Barangay Tugas will then give rise to the
duty of the highest ranking sangguniang barangay member to assume in a
temporary capacity the office of the Punong Barangay.

Corollarily, the unauthorized absence of Punong Barangay Tugas
while in hiding will give rise to a disciplinary administrative case for
excessive absences under Section 60 of the Local Government Code, as
implemented by Article 124 of its Implementing Rules and Regulations.

Your second query has already been answered in the above
discussion.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Acting Secretary

cc: Director Manuel V. Biason
DILG, Region I
Aguila Road, San Fernando City