REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mappamahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

14 July 2008

MR. ENRIQUE G. URRUTIA
Punong Barangay
Barangay Maysan, Valenzuela City

Dear Sir:

This has reference to your letter dated 08 July 2008, seeking advice
on the inaction of the Appropriations Committee Chairman in the person of
Kagawad Emilio Candido regarding the proposed Barangay Budget for the
year 2008. You alleged that the said budget is deliberately not acted upon
because of the following requests of Kagawad Candido, to wit:

• "Submission of appointment, plantilla at payroll ng
mga kawani ng barangay sa nakaraang mga taon.

• Kopya ng 2006, 2007 annual at supplemental
budget.

• Biodata ng ilang piling kawani gayun din ang mga
bagong appoint at pagtanggal sa mga ito, na wala
namang legal na basihan.

• Pagtanggal sa aking mga kaanak sa barangay na
nuon pang 1995 ay naglilingkod na sa tanggapang
ito at sa aking pagkakaalam ay hindi naman ito
isang career position.

• Financial statements at iba pang bagay na, ang COA
ang may saklaw dito"

These requests, according to you, have no basis in law as you
specifically contended that under present conditions, the duties of the
Appropriations Committee is limited on the following set of duties, which are
as follows: "tiyakin kung napaglaanan ng tamang pondo ang lahat
ng mandatory obligations katulad ng 55% Personal Services, 10%
SK Fund, 5% Gender & Development, 5% Calamity Fund, 2%
Discretionary Fund at 20% Development Fund at MOOE na
kailangan sa pagbuo ng budget".

The proper resolution of this case before us hinges on the proper
delineation of the duties and obligation of the Punong Barangay, on the one
hand, and Sangguniang Barangay in the preparation and enactment or
passage of the barangay annual budget, on the other.

Sections 330 and 331 of the Local Government Code provide, viz:

"SEC. 330. Submission of Detailed Statements of
Income and Expenditures for the Barangay Budgets.-
On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of September of
each year, the barangay treasurer shall submit to the
barangay a statement covering the estimates of
income and expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year,
based on a certified statement issued by the city or
municipal treasurer covering the estimates of income
from local sources for the barangay concerned."

"SEC. 331. Preparation of the Barangay Budget.-
(a) Upon receipt of the statement of income and
expenditures from the barangay treasurer, the punong
barangay shall prepare the barangay budget for the
ensuing fiscal year in the manner and within the period
prescribed in this Title and submit the annual
barangay budget to the sangguniang barangay for
legislative enactment.

(b) The total annual appropriations for
personal services of a barangay for one (1) fiscal year
shall not exceed fifty-five percent (55%) of the total
annual income actually realized from local sources
during the next preceding fiscal year.

(c) The barangay shall likewise be subject to
the same budgetary requirements and limitations
hereinabove prescribed."