Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Magsaysay St., Diliman, Quezon City
LEGAL SERVICE
07 July 2006

MR. ELIAS F. FERNANDEZ, JR.
Assistant Director, NBOO
This Department

Dear Mr. Fernandez:

This refers to your request for this level's legal opinion in connection with the fourteen (14) barangays which were reported by the National Statistics Office (NSO) to have zero population. 

As gleaned from your letter and that of former DBM Secretary Romulo L. Neri, it appears that the DBM had been using the DILG official masterlist as basis in the distribution of the Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA) to barangays. However, as reported by the NSO, there are fourteen (14) barangays that have zero population, yet continue receiving their IRA from the DBM since the said barangays have yet to be de-listed from the DILG official masterlist.

Parenthetically, the reason why the DILG could not de-list the said barangays is because no ordinance has been passed abolishing the subject barangays and no plebiscite approving the said abolition could be undertaken simply because the affected barangays have zero population. Precisely, the procedure laid down under Sections 9 and 10 of the Local Government Code (RA 7160) and Article X, Section X of the 1987 Constitution could not be complied with.

It is in this regard that you are now requesting for a legal opinion as to whether or not the Technical Working Group on Geographic Classification (TWG-GC) can recommend to the DBM for the latter to suspend the release of the IRA of the subject barangays on the basis that said LGUs no longer meet the continuing requirements set forth by RA 7160.

In reply thereto, we are of the view that the recommendation of the Technical Working Group of Geographic Classification (TWG-GC) to the DBM to suspend the release of the IRA of barangays with zero population is legally sound and feasible. At this point, it is not amiss to point out that abolition of a barangay is not the same with suspension of the release of the IRA share of the same barangay. Suspension of the IRA share will not automatically result to the abolition of the barangay.

It could not be denied that the abolition of the subject barangays will never be effective unless the same is approved by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite called for the purpose in the political units affected. Verily, with zero population, no votes can ever be cast. The Supreme Court, in many occasions, already ruled that the law does not require the performance of an impossible act (Aquino vs. NLRC [226 SCRA 76]). Thus, we believe that barangays with zero population need not be abolished first before the release of the IRA share of subject barangay can be suspended. This is especially true if the constitutional and statutory requirement of plebiscite for the abolition of the affected barangays is already legally impossible to comply their being no more inhabitants.

Left with no option to abolish, we see Section 285 of the Local Government Code as the immediate legal basis of the TWG-GC's recommendation. Said section provides that the verifiable indicators for the IRA share of barangays are population and equal sharing. Hence, in the release of the IRA in the barangays, population is a mandatory indicator.

Accordingly, if there is zero population, there is no way to determine the proper IRA share of a particular barangay. Hence, suspension of the release of the IRA share is but a necessary consequence of a barangay with zero population there being no more population indicator in determining the amount of the IRA share.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

G. J. P. J. ESTRADA S. MORENO, JR.
Director III

Legal:87/La