Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Dilliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

April 14, 2008

MR. ROMEO O. EVARDONE, SR.
Punong Barangay
Barangay Tomaligues, Calbayog City

Dear Sir:

This has reference to your letter asking whether or not your
assumption as Liga ng mga Barangay (Liga) President, Calbayog City
Chapter, prior to the confirmation of your succession to said position by
the National Liga ng mga Barangay, can be considered as that of a de facto
officer.

Per your representation, based on Resolution No. 01 Series of 2007 of
the Liga of Calbayog City, and without securing prior confirmation by the
National Liga Executive Board, you assumed as President of said Liga by
succession in view of the vacancy in the Liga Presidency brought about by
the election of the former Liga President as regular member of the
Sangguniang Panlungsod.

In reply to your query, may we invite your attention to Section 2,
Article XII of the Constitution and By Laws (CBL) of the Liga ng mga
Barangay sa Pilipinas, viz:

"Vacancies and Succession.- In case of a permanent vacancy in the office of the President due to
refusal to assume office, failure to qualify, death or
removal from office, voluntary resignation or incapacity
to discharge functions of his/her office, the Executive
Vice-President in the case of the National Liga or the
Vice-President, in the case of the local Liga at all levels,
shall assume the office for the unexpired term of the
former. Succession shall take effect only after
confirmation of the National Liga Executive Board. The
Vice-President who assumed the vacant position shall
represent the Liga chapter in the Sangguniang concerned."

(Italics supplied)

In reply thereto, may we note that the Liga President's assumption
as regular Member of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of that city by virtue of
his election to said position in the 14 May 2007 national elections would
result to his voluntary resignation as Punong Barangay as he is not allowed
to hold two elective positions at the same time. Hence, when he chose to
assume the Sangguniang Panlungsod Member position, he is deemed to
have resigned his Punong Barangay position.

Such being the case, he loses his right to be the Liga President since
as a matter of fact and law, he is not anymore the authorized
representative to represent his barangay in the Liga ng mga Barangay City
Federation. Said vacancy in the Liga presidency shall then be remedied by
applying the aforequoted provision of the Liga ng mga Barangay
Constitution and By Laws. It bears to emphasize that as provided in the
aforequoted provision, succession shall take effect only after confirmation
by the National Liga Executive Board. In your case, however, you assumed
the Liga presidency and discharged the functions and duties pertaining
thereto, including the ex-officio representation in the Sangguniang
Panlungsod without first securing the confirmation from the National Liga
Executive Board. The lack of confirmation would, therefore, make your
assumption procedurally but not legally defective.

Hence, at most, you can be considered as a de facto officer. A de
facto officer is one who has the reputation of being the officer that he
assumes to be, and yet is not a good officer in point of law. The acts of
the de facto public officer, insofar as they affect the public, are valid,
binding and with full legal effect. The doctrine is intended not for the
protection of the public officer, but for the protection of the public and
individuals who get involved in the official acts of persons discharging the
duties of public office. As to entitlement of salaries, were there is no de
jure public officer, as in your case, the officer de facto who in good faith has
had possession of the office and has discharged the duties pertaining
thereto, is legally entitled to the emoluments of the office, and may, in an
appropriate action, recover the salary, fees and other compensations
attached to the office.

We hope to have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

cc: Director William C. Paler
DILG Regional Office No. 08
Tacloban City