—

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

LG OPINION NO.W45_s, 2ons

18 June 2008

VICE MAYOR MARIO O. SALVADOR
San Jose City, Nueva Ecija

Dear Vice Mayor Salvador:

This refers to your request for this Department’s opinion anent an
issue involving the veto power of the Local Chief Executive on certain items
in an appropriations ordinance.

In gist, you alleged that your Mayor, Hon. Marivic V. Belena, vetoed
certain items on janitorial and general services in the City Vice Mayor's
office in your 2008 Appropriations Ordinance, which your Sanggunian,
however, failed to override. Nonetheless, it is your position that the items in
the 2007 Annual Appropriations corresponding to those items vetoed by the
Mayor for FY 2008 are deemed re-enacted.

Meantime, you reportedly hired personnel for Janitorial and General
Services but the City Budget Office refused to confirm the said Job Order
and instead referred the matter to the City Legal Officer, who in tum
rendered his legal opinion, stating in part that: “xxx the last sentence of
Section 55 refers to the reenactment of vetoed item/s such once
veto has been overridden by 2/3 votes of all members of the
Sangguniang Panlungsod concerned”.

In sum, your City Legal Officer was of the view, based on his 10 April
2008 letter to your City Budget Officer, that items found in the 2008 Annual
Appropriations which were vetoed by the Local Chief Executive and which
veto was not overridden by the Sanggunian will not result in the
reenactment of the corresponding item found in the 2007 Appropriations
Ordinance since the phrase “appropriation ordinance of the previous
year” found in the last sentence of paragraph (b) of Section 55 pertains to

wae
ah

~2-

the proposed budget prepared in 2007 for fiscal year 2008 and submitted
to the Local Chief Executive for approval.

With all due respect, we beg to disagree with your City Legal Officer’s
view. The wordings of Section 55 (b) of RA 7160 are rather’ clear and
unequivocal to warrant any contrary view. The provision exactly states:

“SEC. 55. Veto Power of the Local Chief
Executive.- xxx (b) The local chief executive, except the
Punong barangay, shall have the power to veto any
Particular item or items of an appropriations
ordinance, an ordinance or resolution adopting a local
development plan and public investment program, or an
ordinance directing the payment of money or creating
liability. In such a case, the veto shall not affect the
item or items which are not objected to. The_vetoed
item or items shall not take effect unless the
Sanggunian overrides the veto in the manner herein
provided; otherwise, the item or items in the
appropriations ordinance of the previous year
corresponding to those vetoed, if any, shall be deemed
reenacted.” (underlining ours)

The last paragraph of the above provision simply advances the rule
that when the Local Chief Executive exercises his/her line veto power in an
enacted Annual Appropriations Ordinance, those items are simply left for
naught. However, the Sanggunian concemed may or may not override the
said veto, and when they override the same, it is the veto this time whichis.
left dead thereby making the vetoed item deemed approved by the Local ©
Chief Executive. Definitely, if the Sanggunian concerned succeeds in
overriding the Local Chief Executive’s veto, the vetoed items are considered
already approved by the Local Chief Executive. If, however, the veto is not
overridden by the Sanggunian, the item or items in the Appropriations
Ordinance of the previous year corresponding to those vetoed, if any, shall
be deemed reenacted. Along this line, the “appropriation ordinance of
the previous year” definitely refers to the duly approved Appropriation
Ordinance for Fiscal Year 2007 and not the Proposed Annual Appropriation
for Fiscal Year 2008 submitted to the Local Chief Executive for approval, as
the City Legal Officer had opined. It would be absurd to accept the
Proposition that “reenactment” of the vetoed items in the budget

Ld
1

a

~3-

ordinance will take place when the Sangqunian overrides the veto. As a
maiter of fact and law, there is no need to reenact when the vetoed items
were already restored to its original place by means of overriding the veto
since by doing so, the disapproved proposed item is deemed approved.

It is, therefore, this Department’s opinion that items in your 2007
Appropriations Ordinance corresponding to exactly the same items in your.
enacted 2008 Appropriations Ordinance which were vetoed by the Mayor,
are deemed reenacted, if the said veto was not overridden by the
Sangqunian concermed.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADER
Undersecretary, i“

Legal:87/La

cc: Director Josefina Castilla-Go
DILG Regional Office No. I
San Femando City, Pampanga

Atty. Rainier R. Esquerra
City Legal Officer

City Hall, San Jose City
Nueva Ecija

