Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

19 March 2007

ATTY. DANIEL T. ALVIAR
Municipal Legal Officer
San Pedro, Laguna

Dear Atty. Alviar:
This refers to your earlier letter requesting this Department to render an opinion on whether it is required that the recommendation of an appointee to fill up a permanent vacancy in the Sangguniang Barangay be in the form of a Sangguniang Barangay Resolution before the Mayor could validly appoint the replacement or whether a mere "Endorsement" which was approved by the majority of the members of the Sangguniang but without the approval and signature of the Barangay Chairman be already sufficient as a form of recommendation to fill up such vacancy.

In reply to your query, may we invite your attention to the express provisions of Section 45 (a) (3) of the Local Government Code, to wit:

"SEC. 45. Permanent Vacancies in the Sangguniang.
(a) Permanent vacancies in the sanggunian where automatic
succession provided above do not apply shall be filled by
appointment in the following manner:

xxx xxx xxx

(3) The city or municipal mayor, in case of
sangguniang barangay, upon recommendation of the
the sangguniang barangay concerned."

From the aforementioned provision of law, it is clear that the city or municipal mayor is the one vested with the power to appoint a Sangguniang Barangay Member to fill up a permanent vacancy in the Sangguniang Barangay. Such power to appoint, however, is subject to the requirement of recommendation from the Sangguniang Barangay where the vacancy occurred.

At this point, it is relevant to note that the law does not specifically provide for a particular form by which the recommendation of the Sangguniang Barangay concerned has to be expressed.

Be that as it may, measures enacted by all sanggunians, including the Sangguniang Barangay for that matter, could either be in the form of an ordinance or a resolution. An ordinance has been defined as that measure enacted by the sangguniang which provides for a permanent rule of conduct within its territorial jurisdiction. On the other hand, a resolution is enacted by the sangguniang translating its expression of opinions, sentiments.

Generally, therefore, since a "recommendation" is an expression of opinion and sentiment of the Sangguniang, the same has to be done in the form of a resolution. However, it does not mean that other forms are unacceptable. It is the contents and the procedure of its passage that controls. Therefore, even if called "endorsement", if the contents of such endorsement is the joint and collective opinion of the Sangguniang indicating a majority by the members thereof present there being a substantial compliance on the requirement of recommendation as mandated under the Local Government Code, the foregoing notwithstanding, may it be emphasized that without necessarily dwelling on whether or not such endorsement is already sufficient, the Mayor has already issued an appointment in favor of Mr. Igmedio D. Seradilla as Sangguniang Barangay Member to fill up the permanent vacancy in that Sangguniang Barangay, due to the untimely death of Mr. Andrew Miñosa.

Along this line, it is not amiss to point out that the appointment is vested in the Mayor, under the Rules on Evidence, enjoys the presumption of regularity and, therefore, has to be given effect and respect. Thus, any person questioning the appointment for being legally infirmed or having made not in accordance with law, has to go to court for its invalidation. Unless the court shall declare it to be void, such appointment has to be afforded respect and efficacy and the Punong Barangay thereat, regardless of her impression as to the legality of the appointment, is not at liberty to unilaterally construe it to be invalid sans the court declaration to that effect. If the Punong Barangay believes that the appointment is questionable, recourse is to be had before the court for its invalidation. Meantime, adhering to the rule of law, the Punong Barangay has to respect and give effect to the appointment.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,
WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

cc: Regional Director Roberto C. Abejero
DILG Region IV-A
Tirso Complex, Taguig City