Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY
DILG OPINION NO. 11 S. 2009
February 23, 2009

HON. DENISSE ANGELICA A. HECHANOVA
City Councilor & SK Federation President
Makati City, Metro Manila

Dear Hon. Hechanova:

This refers to your letter seeking the opinion of this Department as to whether the Sangguniang Kabataan Federation or the Sangguniang Barangay has the authority to discipline a SK Chairman.

Apparently, the instant query arose because of your confusion on whether a SK Chairman should be considered an elected member of the Sangguniang Barangay. If he is, you are of the impression that the Sangguniang Barangay has the authority to discipline the SK Chairman. Otherwise, the SK Federation has such authority. You stated further in your letter-query that the purported illegal acts of the respondent pertain more to his official capacity as SK Chairman and not as ex-officio member of the Sangguniang Barangay.

In response thereto, we invite your attention to our DILG Opinion No. 29, series of 2002 dated 07 February 2002, wherein we clarified that SK officials are considered elective barangay officials. This is based on the pronouncement made by the Supreme Court in Marquez vs. COMELEC (G.R. No. 127318, 25 August 1999) and is consistent with Article 71, Rule XIV of the Rules and Regulations Implementing RA 7160 which includes members of the SK in the enumeration of elective barangay officials. Thus, pursuant to Section 61 of the Local Government Code of 1991, a complaint against the SK Chairman on any of the grounds enumerated in Section 60 of the said law shall be filed before the sangguniang bayan or sangguniang panlungsod concerned, he being an elective barangay official. The case will then proceed in accordance with Section 60 to 68 of the same law.

However if the act/s complained of strictly pertain/s to his being a member of the SK Federation, for example, violation of SK Federation Constitution and By-Laws, then the complaint shall be filed before the SK Federation concerned pursuant to Section 6, Article XV, of the SK Constitution and By-Laws. The complaint will then be decided by a majority vote of all the members of the SK Federation concerned, excluding that of the member complained against.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

is/28/md