REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

HON. WALFREDO A. SUMILANG II
Sangguniang Panlungsod Member
Tayabas City, Quezon

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter requesting for the Department’s legal opinion
regarding the appointments issued by the President of the Republic of the
Philippines to you and to Ms. Tomasan N. Llaneta as Sangguniang Panlungsod
Members of that city.

In your letter, you stated that the Municipality of Tayabas was converted
into a component city and for such conversion, a plebiscite was held on 14 July
2007 where said conversion was ratified by the people. The municipality had
eight (8) regular Members of the Sangguniang Bayan. However, in view of its
conversion duly ratified in a plebiscite, there is a need for two (2) more Members
to complete the new set of the Sangguniang Panlungsod which under RA 6636,
is fixed by law to be with ten (10) regular Sangguniang Panlungsod Members for
component cities. After receipt of the appointments issued by the President to
complete the new set of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, you and Ms. Llaneta
immediately took your oath of office and assumed as Sangguniang Panlungsod
Members. In the 03 March 2008 session of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of
Tayabas City, City Vice Mayor Venerando Rea, however, refused to recognize
you and Ms. Llaneta as the new Sangguniang Panlungsod Members despite the
presentation of your credentials, i.e. appointments papers and oath of office. As
a result, you and Ms. Llaneta were prevented from participating in the then on-
going deliberation of the Sangguniang Panlungsod. Your query are now on the
following issues:

1. "Does City Vice Mayor Venerando Rea has the power
to deny recognition of the appointments made by the
President of the Philippines in accordance with the
provisions of Republic Act No. 6636?

2. Does the City Vice Mayor possess the power to
prevent the two (2) additional duly appointed
members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod ng Tayabas
from participating in the deliberation of the council?
If not, can he be held accountable for this act?

3. If the two (2) newly appointed member of the SP of
Tayabas are to be recognized, when are they
considered to have assumed their official functions?"

In reply to your first query, it is settled in our jurisprudence that actions
made by public officials enjoy the presumption of legality and validity until such
time declared otherwise by a competent court. At this point, may we note that the
President issued said appointments in furtherance of her residual powers under
Section 16, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution in relation to RA 6636 which
mandates that for component cities, there shall be ten (10) regular members of
the Sangguniang. In view of the insufficiency of the number of regular members of
the then Sangguniang Bayan, the President exercised her constitutional authority
to issue the two (2) appointments. Therefore, it is not within the prerogative of
the City Vice Mayor to recognize or not said appointments. It is not also the
prerogative of the City Vice Mayor to exercise discretion whether to allow you
and Ms. Llaneta or not to participate in the Sangguniang sessions since having
been appointed as SP Members, your membership to the Sangguniang
Panlungsod shall be by operation of law, the President having issued said
appointments pursuant to her residual authority under the Constitution.

Stated differently, your membership to the Sangguniang Panlungsod is not
determined through the recognition or non-recognition by the City Vice Mayor as
in fact legally saying, you and Ms. Llaneta are now considered Sangguniang
Panlungsod Members by virtue of the appointments issued by the President. The
City Vice Mayor should be reminded of the rule of law such that the appointments
having been duly issued by the President and their authenticity having been
already verified, he cannot just unilaterally disregard the same but instead, he
should accord due respect to it, owing to the authority who issued the said
appointments. If he believes that the appointments may have suffered from
certain legal infirmities, his remedy is not to prevent you from participating in the
Sangguniang sessions or not recognizing you as Sangguniang Panlungsod
Members but by taking the legal steps, he should go to court and bring to fore the
legality or illegality of the said appointments. Meantime, there being no
declaration from any court on the state of said appointments, the same should be
given legal force and effect.

In reply to your second query, may we note that our reply to your first issue
has already answered portions thereof. In addition, Section 3 (e) of RA 3019 is