REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magpabagal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY


04 E OPINION NO. 38 - S 2007
April 26, 2007

PEDRITO E. CASISID
Poblacion, Tibiao
Antique

Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the
following issues, to wit:

1) Whether or not Barangay officials can avail of the Christmas
bonuses of not less than One Thousand Pesos (Php 1,000.00)
or equivalent to one (1) month salary/honorarium?

2) If a barangay kagawad or Barangay Secretary enters the
service effective October 01, how many percent of the Five
Thousand Pesos (Php 5,000) cash gift can he or she be
entitled to?

3) Does Barangay Poblacion have the right to request the
municipal government to grant permission to take over the
operation and maintenance of a municipal public market within
its territory. If there are conditions to consider, please
enlighten us. (sic)

In reply to your first and second queries, we deem it appropriate to
refer the same to the Department of Budget and Management considering
that these are matters within the competence of that office to act upon.

With regard to your third query, please be informed that the right to
request permission to take over the operation of the municipal public
market is an absolute right of your barangay. However the right to grant
or deny such request is within the discretion of the Municipality

considering that the said municipal public market is owned and operated
by the said municipality.

Such being the case, your request to take over the operation and
maintenance of a municipal public market should be based on justifiable
grounds so that the said municipality has also its basis to grant or deny
the said request.

As to the conditions that to be considered by your barangay, please
be informed that they are also within the discretion of the municipality
being the owner of the public market if indeed it will decide to grant such
request.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
OIC Undersecretary

cc: DIRECTOR EVELYN A. TROMPETA
DILG, Region VI
6 Parola Street, Fort San Pedro
Iloilo City

Legal: 94/Merle