Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT.

A, Francisco Gold Condominium I, EDSA
or. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

NILG OPINION NO _44_§. 20N5__..

September 6, 2005

VICE MAYOR JULIO C. NARAG
Cainta, Rizal

Dear Vice-Mayor Narag:

This refers to your request for this Department's legal opinion, in
Connection with Art. 83 (d)(1) of the IRR of 7160 regarding the
temporary vacancies and succession of elective local officials vis-a-vis,
the Administrative Order No. 2005-004 dated 30 August 2005, issued
by Cainta, Rizal Mayor Ramon A. Ilagan, wherein the Mayor designated
the Municipal Administrator as “in-charge” of the Office of the Mayor
from September 2 - 15, 2005, in view of the duly approved leave of
absence for the United States of Mayor Ilagan.

In reply thereto, please be informed that Art. 83 (d)(1) of the
IRR of RA 7160 is rather clear in stating that a temporary vacancy in
the offices of the Governor, Mayor or Punong barangay arises in the
following physical or legal reasons such as but not limited to, (1)
Leave of absence; (2) travel abroad, and (3) suspension from office.

Should any of the above causes occur, the Vice Governor, Vice
Mayor or highest ranking sangguniang barangay member shall
automatically exercise the powers of the local chief executive
concerned, except the power to appoint, suspend or dismiss
employees which can only be exercised if the period of temporary
incapacity exceeds thirty (30) working days.

Therefore, upon the effectivity of the Local Chief Executive's
approved leave of absence, the Local Vice Chief Executive
AUTOMATICALLY assumes the post of the former in an acting capacity.
Along that line, it is wise to inform you that the authority of the local
chief executive to designate an officer-in-charge (OIC) of his/her office
only applies when the said local chief executive travels outside his/her
territorial jurisdiction, but within the country for a period of not
exceeding three (3) days (Section 46 (c), RA 7160). Perforce, by
express provision of law, a Local Chief Executive can not designate an

OIC to his/her office when he/she travels abroad or goes on a leave of
absence.