Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
April 23, 2007

VICE-MAYOR JOVITO E. ELLORIN
Santiago, Ilocos Sur

Dear Vice-Mayor Ellorin:

This has reference to your earlier letter requesting for this Department's legal opinion on the following queries, which we quoted herein in toto:

"1) Although our local revenue code has no specific provision imposing taxes on electric companies, can the LGU impose tax on them by using the provision on "retailers" or "all other similar activities consisting essentially of the sales of services for a fee" instead of enacting a separate tax ordinance?"

"2) Regarding the tax recovery adjustment of ISECO, are they correct in saying that only the consumers of this municipality will carry the burden of paying the situs of the tax instead of passing it on to the consumers of the other municipalities and cities of the province?"

As stated in your letter, when your municipality started to impose taxes on the Ilocos Sur Electric Cooperative (ISECO), which has its main office in your municipality, said ISECO refused to pay the taxes contending that it is a cooperative, which is exempted by law from paying taxes. Not amenable with such contention of ISECO, the Sangguniang Bayan passed a resolution asking the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) whether ISECO is registered therein and whether your municipality has the right to impose taxes on ISECO. The CDA replied by saying that ISECO has not registered therein and that your municipality has the right to impose taxes on said electric cooperative. Notwithstanding the reply of CDA, ISECO still refused to pay their taxes by invoking, this time, the absence of any provision in your local revenue code imposing such taxes and that a separate ordinance is still necessary for such imposition. You stated in your letter that the SB heeded with the suggestion of ISECO but during the public hearing of the separate tax, a disagreement arose concerning the situs of tax. Hence, your queries.

At the outset, may we invite your attention to the following provisions of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160):

"Section 133. Common limitations on the Taxing Powers of Local Government Units.— Unless otherwise provided herein, the exercise of the taxing powers of provinces, cities, municipalities, and barangays shall not extend to the levy of the following:

xxx

(n) Taxes, fees, or charges, on Countryside and Barangay Business Enterprises and cooperatives duly registered under RA 6810 and Republic Act Numbered 6938, otherwise known as the Cooperative Code of the Philippines" respectively.

"Section 193. Withdrawal of Tax Exemption Privileges.— Unless otherwise provided in this Code, tax exemptions or incentives granted to or presently enjoyed by all persons, whether natural or juridical, including government-owned or-controlled corporations, except local water districts, cooperatives duly registered under RA 6938, non-stock and non-profit hospitals and educational institutions, are hereby withdrawn upon the effectivity of this Code." (Emphasis Supplied)

Based on the foregoing, cooperatives, without distinction and thus includes electric cooperatives, shall be exempt from payment of taxes, fees or charges imposed by provinces, cities, municipalities and barangays, provided however, that these cooperatives are duly registered under RA 6938 or the Cooperative Code of the Philippines.

In view thereof, we concur with the reply of the CDA that since ISECO was not duly registered under RA 6938, it cannot avail of the exemption provided for under the aforementioned provisions of the LGC of 1991. Since ISECO is not tax exempt, the Municipality of Santiago therefore may impose taxes, fees or charges on said electric cooperative. As a matter of fact, in the case of Philippine Rural Electric Cooperative Association, Inc. vs. DILG (G.R. No. 143076, 10 June 2003), the Supreme Court ruled that the Local Government Code only exempted from taxes electric cooperatives registered under RA 6938 and not electric cooperatives registered under Presidential Decree No. 269. However, before the Municipality of Santiago may impose and collect such taxes, fees or charges on ISECO, necessarily, the same must first be levied under a duly enacted tax ordinance.

Coming now to your first query, perhaps your local revenue code has existing provisions imposing taxes on “retailers” and “all other similar activities consisting essentially of the sales of services for a fee” and you are now contemplating of using that provision to cover the imposition and collection of tax on ISECO.

It is our considered view that you can use the provision on "all other similar activities consisting essentially of the sales of services for