Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

15 July 2008

MAYOR QUIRINO G. BONGCAYAO, JR.
Baao, Camarines Sur

Dear Mayor Bongcayao:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking the Department's opinion relative to the seemingly conflicting provisions of your Municipal Ordinance No. 32, series of 1993, entitled "An Ordinance Regulating the Operation of Cockpit and Cockfighting in the Municipality of Baao" and Section 447 (3)(v) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), which are respectively quoted hereunder, to wit:

- Section 11 of Ordinance No. 32, series of 1993

"SECTION 11. Licensing of Cockpit. Subject to the provisions of this ordinance, the Office of the Mayor with the concurrence of the Sangguniang Bayan, shall issue license to operate cockpit in the municipality."

- Section 447 (3)(v) of the Local Government Code of 1991

"SECTION 447. Powers, Duties, Functions and Compensation. – (a) The sangguniang bayan, as the legislative body of the municipality, shall enact ordinances, approve resolutions and appropriate funds for the general welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code and in the proper exercise of the corporate powers of the municipality as provided for under Section 22 of this Code, and shall:

(3) Subject to the provisions of Book II of this Code, grant franchises, enact ordinances authorizing the issuance of permits or licenses, or enact ordinances levying taxes, fees and charges upon such conditions and for such purposes intended to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the municipality, and pursuant to this legislative authority shall:

(v) Any law to the contrary notwithstanding, authorize and license the establishment, operation, and maintenance of cockpits, and regulate cockfighting and commercial breeding of gamecocks: Provided, That existing rights should not be prejudiced; xxx" (emphasis supplied)

At the outset, please be informed that since the subject Municipal Ordinance No. 32, series of 1993, has been passed in accordance with the procedural requirements set by the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) and in fact is implemented for almost fifteen (15) years now, it therefore enjoys the presumption of validity and remains to be enforceable, unless declared otherwise by our courts upon proper judicial action.

Be that it may, for academic discussion, please be informed that the issuance of mayor's permit to operate a cockpit involves a series of steps, namely (1) the sangguniang concerned (the sangguniang bayan in your case) shall first enact an ordinance authorizing and licensing the establishment of cockpits and (2) pursuant to such ordinance, the municipal mayor shall then issue the mayor's permit to operate a cockpit.

The first step involves the application of the aforementioned Section 447 (3)(v) of the Local Government Code of 1991. The ordinance so enacted authorizing and licensing the establishment of cockpits is referred to as the "enabling ordinance".

Pursuant to the aforesaid enabling ordinance, Section 444 (b)(3)(iv) of the Local Government Code pertaining to the function of the Municipal Mayor to issue licenses and permits and suspend or revoke the same for any violation of the conditions upon which said licenses or permits had been issued, shall now be applied. This is the second and final step.

The foregoing rule has been further clarified by the Supreme Court in the case of Canet vs. Decena [GR No. 155344, 20 January 2004]. The Supreme Court held in this case that under the Local Government Code of 1991, a sangguniang bayan has the authority to enact an ordinance authorizing and licensing the establishment of cockpits. A municipal mayor cannot issue a mayor’s permit to operate a cockpit without an enabling ordinance. The Supreme Court held further that a general ordinance empowering a mayor to issue permits cannot be used to justify the issuance of a license. Finally, the Supreme Court held that a mayor cannot also be compelled to issue such a license since this would constitute an undue encroachment on the mayor’s administrative prerogatives.

In view of the foregoing, we are of the view that Section 11 of your Municipal Ordinance No. 32, series of 1993 in so far as it provides that "xxx the Office of the Mayor, with the concurrence of the Sangguniang Bayan, shall issue license to operate cockpit in the municipality" (emphasis supplied) is questionable for being inconsistent with the provisions of the Local Government Code of 1991 discussed above. The concurrence of the Sangguniang Bayan is no longer needed at the time when the Municipal Mayor exercises his power to issue permit or license to operate cockpit in the municipality since the Sangguniang Bayan's authorization to such activity was given, in the first place, via the enabling ordinance.