Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

17 April 2006

Honorable GILDA E. PICO
Acting President and CEO
Land Bank of the Philippines
Makati City

Dear Sir:

This refers to the letter of Mayor Sonia Torres-Aquino of Tanauan City, requesting for our legal opinion and/or assistance regarding the letter of Vice President Reynauld R. Villafuerte of the Banking Legal Services Department, Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), which stated that the city government is required to submit a Sangguniang Panlungsod Resolution designating the City Mayor as one of the authorized signatories of the local government account based on the bank account internal policy, which we shall herein quote, in part, thus: "For LGU: xxx b) Resolution issued by the Sangguniang ng LGU concerned duly notarized incorporating the following: xxx officers authorized to sign and the nature and extent of such authority" (Item 7.14, 0101.1.8, Branch Manual, August 2001). It also stated that such requirement is consistent with Article 86 (vi) of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code (RA 7160), which states that the Mayor may "upon authorization of the Sangguniang Bayan, represents the city in all its transaction, and sign on its behalf all bonds, contracts, and obligations, and such other documents made pursuant to law or ordinance".

With all due respect, we would like to take exceptions on the aforementioned premise. We are of the humble view that the Sangguniang Panlungsod Resolution designating the City Mayor as the authorized signatory to the LGU account is not anymore necessary as it is not even required by law. Moreover, the aforequoted portion of Article 86 (vi) of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code appears to be erroneous.

At the outset, let it be emphasized that the law governing local government units in general is RA 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991. With respect to the City of Tanauan, RA 9005, otherwise known as the "Charter of the City of Tanauan" was passed on 02 February 2001, converting the Municipality of Tanauan, Province of Batangas, into a component city to be known as the City of Tanauan. Under Section 59 of RA 9005, it is provided that the provisions of RA 7160 and such laws as are applicable to component cities shall govern the City of Tanauan insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of RA 9005.

However, in case of silence of RA 9005, the provisions of RA 7160 shall apply suppletorily being the general law on the matter of local governance.

At this point, it is not amiss to point out that per Section 15 of RA 7160, every Local Government Unit created is a body politic and corporate endowed with powers to be exercised by it in conformity with law. As such, it shall exercise powers as a political subdivision of the national government and as a corporate entity representing the inhabitants of its territory. This provision is reiterated in Section 3 of the Charter of the City of Tanauan. It is well to note that RA 7160, for all LGUs in general, and RA 9005, for the City of Tanauan in particular, were enacted to give flesh to the constitutional mandate found in Section 3, Article X of the 1987 Constitution, to "provide for a more responsive and accountable local government structure instituted through a system of decentralization with effective mechanism of recall, initiative and referendum, allocate among the different LGUs their powers, responsibilities and resources, and provide for the qualifications, election, appointment and removal, term, salaries, powers and functions and duties of local officials, and all matters relating to the organization and operation of the local units".

Along this line, Section 8 (B) (1) (f) of RA 9005 provides for the power, among others, of the City Mayor, thus: "Represent the City in all its business transactions and sign on its behalf all bonds, contracts, obligations, and such other documents with authority from the sangguniang panlungsod or pursuant to law or ordinance". Article 86 (B) (1) (vi) of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA 7160, which was cited in the letter of Atty. Villafuerte, likewise provides, thus: "Represent the city in all its business transactions and sign in its behalf all bonds, contracts, obligations and such other documents upon authority of the Sangguniang Panlungsod or pursuant to law or ordinance".

A closer scrutiny of the aforesaid provisions would show that the City Mayor is empowered by law to represent the city in all its business transactions and sign in its behalf pertinent documents subject to the following conditions, to wit:

1. UPON AUTHORITY OF THE SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGSOD; or
2. PURSUANT TO LAW; or
3. PURSUANT TO ORDINANCE.

It must be stressed that the three (3) conditions mentioned above are separated by the word "or", and such word is a "disjunctive term signifying disassociation and independence of one thing from each of the other things enumerated. It should, as a rule, be construed in the sense in which it ordinarily implies, as a disjunctive word" (People vs. Martin, 39 SCRA 340; Katindig vs. People, 74 Phil. 45). Likewise, in its elementary sense, "or" as used in a statute is a