REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Codominimum II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. JOSE C. OBREBO
Municipal Local Government Operations Officer
DILG Municipal Field Office
Daram, Samar

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your query on the proper application of Section 45 (b)
of the Local Government Code referring to the manner of filling up
permanent vacancy in the Sanggunian Bayan.

In point is the proper interpretation of Section 45 (b) of the Code,
which states that:

"(b) Only the nominee of that political party under
which the sanggunian member concerned had been
elected and whose elevation to the position next higher
in rank created the last vacancy in the sanggunian shall
be appointed in the manner hereinabove provided. The
appointee shall come from the same political party as
that of the sanggunian member who caused the vacancy
and shall serve the unexpired term of the vacant
office."

You stated that a permanent vacancy occurred in the Office of the
Mayor by reason of the death of its incumbent. According to you, there are
varied interpretations given by the political parties in your municipality with
respect to Section 45 (b) of the Code, which we shall restate as follows:

1. "The political party to be appointed comes from the
Mayor, considering that the Mayor created the
vacancy;

2. The vacancy occurred in the 1st SB position, since
the former 1st Kagawad is now the Vice Mayor,
considering the need or representation of his
political party in the sanggunian; and

3. The vacancy occurred in the 8th SB position
considering that all incumbent elected municipal
officials succeeded to the next higher position."

May we inform you that this issue has already been settled by the
Supreme Court in the case of Navarro vs. Court of Appeals (355 SCRA 672).
Your situation is very much in all fours with the case aforestated where the
Supreme Court ruled that it is the 1st Sanggunian Bayan Member who
created the last vacancy and, therefore, it is the political party of the 1st
Sanggunian Bayan Member, who succeeded as Vice Mayor, which will issue
the political party nomination.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

CC: Director William C. Paler
DILG Regional Office No. 08
Tacloban City
The Sanggunian Bayan
Thru: The Presiding Officer
Daram, Samar