Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
DILG OPINION NO. 24 S. 2005
10 March 2005

HON. ZURIEL S. ZARAGOZA
Sangguniang Panlalawigan Member
Provincial Capitol Building
Vigan City, Ilocos Sur

Dear SP Member Zaragoza:

This refers to your request for legal opinion on certain issues relative
to the measures passed, sessions conducted and acts of sangguniang
members, of your sanggunian, which apparently, as can be deduced from
your letter, are perceived by you as either defective or illegal, such that your
queries were to the effect of asking the Department on whether the
sessions, measures passed and acts of some of your colleagues, are
legal/legally binding.

Please be informed at the outset that this Department's duty is to
implement the Local Government Code via, inter alia, the rendition of legal
opinions. Legal opinions for that matter are executive constructions given
by the government agency concerned on a particular law it is tasked to
implement. However, legal opinions have its limitations, such that it cannot
be rendered on issues that require factual adjudication in view of some
conflicting claims.

May it be noted that the passage of an ordinance involves two (2)
aspects, i.e. (1) the substantive; and (2) the procedural. The former refers
to the necessity of an ordinance to comply with the provisions of the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), other existing laws and the
Constitution. The latter, in the meantime, refers to the manner by which an
ordinance has to be enacted. Any violation of these two (2) aspects may
render an ordinance invalid.

As regards the substantive aspect, the same involves a question of
law which may be validly addressed through the rendition of a legal opinion,
as the latter entails only an interpretation of the provisions of the ordinance
vis-Ã -vis the laws and Constitution whereupon said ordinance should be
compliant with. Insofar as the procedural aspect is concerned, let it be
stressed that this aspect usually involves more of questions of fact, because
it involves the contemporaneous events that surrounded the
procedure/manner of the passage of the ordinance. Sometimes, a necessity
of factual determination as to the proper procedure undertaken in the
passage of a particular ordinance would become imperative if the matter is
timely raised by any proper party. In such a case, the aid of the court to
resolve the issue has to be implored since this Department, not being a
court, is not empowered to adjudicate factual issues.

Moreover, please be informed of the rule that measures already
passed by the local legislative body enjoys the presumption of validity,
which presupposes that the acts of the members of the sanggunian and the
sessions conducted that led to the passage of the measures also enjoys the
presumption of regularity and validity. Such conclusion is anchored on Rule
131, Section 3 (m) of the Rules on Evidence, Rules of Court, whereby the
presumption that official duty has been regularly performed are satisfactory
if uncontradicted by other evidence.

The "evidence" being referred to now necessitates the production of
documentary and testimonial pieces of evidence, before the proper forum,
and that is indubitably, our regular courts.

Ergo, it is short of saying that your concerns should have been
expressed in a proper legal procedure as may be provided for by the Rules
of Court to be filed before the proper court, and not through a letter query
before this Department.

Be that as it may, for academic discussion, it is wise to advise you of
certain points in connection with your queries which are heretofore restated,
viz:

1. "There were no Internal Rules of Procedure that was
adopted to govern the conduct of the session. Attach (sic)
herewith are the minutes of the session for July 14 and 20,
2004 which shows that the body failed to adopt an IRP in
spite of the fact that one member did move for the adoption
of the old IRP but was not acted upon by the presiding
officer. The presiding officer only manifested in session
that the body will maintain status quo, but also failed to
present it to the floor for approval. Is there such thing as
status quo with regards to the Internal Rules of Procedure?
Are the sessions conducted under such set-up legally
binding?

2. The permanent presiding officer, in the person of Vice-
Governor Deogracias Victor B. Savellano was absent
during the first two sessions, reason by which Board
Member Ronald Singson acted as temporary presiding
officer on July 14 session and Board Member Jeremias
Singson acting as the temporary presiding officer on July
20. It is clearly stipulated in Section 49 of the Local
Government Code and Section 10 Rule II of the old IRP that
in the absence of the presiding officer, "the members
present and constituting a quorum shall elect (sic) among
themselves a temporary presiding officer".