Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

01 June 2009

PUNONG BARANGAY NAPOLEON T. TANDOG
Barangay Poblacion
San Jose, Romblon

Dear PB Tandog:

This has reference to your earlier letter addressed to DILG Assistant Provincial Director Danton Arevalo, that Province, asking for a legal opinion regarding Administrative Case No. 2008-03 for Oppression and Abuse of Authority filed against you by Edison Manuel before the Office of the Sanggunian Bayan in San Jose, Romblon. DILG Region IV-B Director Rolando L. Rafael forwarded said letter to this level.

An examination of the documents attached to your letter reveals that the Sanggunian Bayan has already came up with Resolution No. 12, series of 2009 dated 17 March 2009 embodying the Decision in your case. The Decision stated in its dispositive portion that the Sanggunian Bayan found you guilty of the administrative offense of Oppression and Abuse of Authority and sentenced you to suffer a suspension for six (6) months without pay effective upon receipt of a copy thereof.

In your letter, you said that in conducting the proceedings of your case and in the contents of the Decision itself, you observed and in fact, specifically enumerated therein the alleged irregular/inconsistent acts committed by the Sanggunian Bayan. Thus, you are now seeking this Department's legal opinion for a clearer explanation on the matter.

In reply thereto, please be informed that we are constrained from rendering a legal opinion on the matter. Since the Sanggunian Bayan has already rendered a Decision in your case as embodied in its Resolution No. 12, series of 2009 dated 17 March 2009, any question as to the irregularities in the proceedings conducted by that body or on the invalidity of the

Decision itself is already a proper subject of an administrative appeal filed before the Sanggunian Panlalawigan. Your remedy therefore is not to seek for legal opinion from this Department but to file an appeal pursuant to Section 67 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), thus:

"Section 67. Administrative Appeals. - Decisions in administrative cases may, within thirty (30) days from receipt thereof, be appealed to the following:

(a) The sanggunian panlalawigan, in the case of decisions of the sanggunian panlungsod of component cities and the sanggunian bayan;"

In one of the follow-ups made, it was represented that you already filed an appeal before the Sanggunian Panlalawigan in accordance with the aforementioned provision but that August Body, unfortunately, has taken no action thereto up to this date. The matter is already within the domain of that August Body. Accordingly, we suggest that you file a Motion for Early Resolution of your appeal before the Sanggunian Panlalawigan. This Department cannot, in exercising its general supervisory power over local government units, pre-empt or interfere with the Sanggunian Panlalawigan's disposition of the appeal by rendering an opinion on the issue.

Moreover, in the 2nd Indorsement of Dir. Rafael, it is represented that Mayor Filipino T. Tandog of San Jose, Romblon has not yet implemented the Decision of the Sanggunian Bayan on the case at hand. In this regard, may we invite your attention to Section 68 of the Local Government Code of 1991, thus:

"SECTION 68. Execution Pending Appeal. - An appeal shall not prevent a decision from becoming final or executory. The respondent shall be considered as having been placed under preventive suspension during the pendency of an appeal in the event he wins such appeal. In the event the appeal results in an exoneration, he shall be paid his salary and such other emoluments during the pendency of the appeal."

Based on the foregoing, the decision of the Sanggunian Bayan shall immediately be final and executory upon receipt of a copy thereof by