Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Goid Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Magagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
07 November 2006

MAYOR FILIPINA GRACE R. AMERICA
Kabantang, Quezon

Dear Mayor America:

This refers to your request for this Department's legal opinion as to the "soundness" of the proposition embodied in Sanggunian Bayan Resolution No. 189, s. 2005, entitled: "Isang Kakailanganing Local Project Monitoring Committee at Nagataas ng Municipal Level." Appended to this said Resolution is an approval, which provided for the establishment of a Local Project Monitoring Committee (LPMC for brevity).

It appears that the said proposed Ordinance, which was resolved, defined the composition of the LPMC as follows, and we quote:

"Chairman - PPLB
Vice Chairman - Budget Officer
   MPDC Planning Officer I
   Engineer II
   Chairman, Committee on Finance
   (1) Kinakauwan mula sa pederal na
   relihiyon
   na pipiliin ng majorya ngMembers ng LPMC
   (1) Kinatawan mula sa pribadong
   sektor
   na pipiliin ng majority ng members
   ng PLMC
   Punong Barangay kung saan gaganapin ang proyekto."

Likewise, the Ordinance laid down the powers and authority of the LPMC which include, inter alia, to review/revise the Program of Works from the Municipal Engineer, and to sign the same, hence said Program of Works is to be implemented by the Office of the Mayor.

In vetoing said Ordinance, you have presented three grounds, which in a nutshell, are the following, to wit:

I. That the Ordinance was made in ultra vires as it violated the separation of powers principle;

II. That the duty to review and revise all Program of Work is vested upon the Municipal Engineer; and

III. The implementation of the Program of Work is a responsibility of the executive office of a local government unit.

In reply to your query, may it be stated at the outset that we fully agree with the reasons you have presented in your September 2005 veto message or the instant Ordinance No. 05, s. 2006. In addition, please be guided by the following disquisition:

It must be stressed that the Mayor, on one hand, and the Vice Mayor and Sangguniang Bayan Members, on the other, perform separate and distinct functions under the Local Government Code. The Mayor is charged with the enforcement and execution of laws and ordinances as the Chief Executive of the Local Government Unit (LGU) concerned. On the other hand, the Vice Mayor and Sangguniang Bayan Members are constituted under Section 43 of the same Code as the legislative body of the LGU and thus perform legislative functions which pertain to the enactment of ordinances.

Based on the principle of separation of powers and functions, there can be no encroachment with the other's duties, powers and functions, such that the Mayor cannot legislate an ordinance. Hence the sanggunian enforce and execute ordinances. Their respective duties and functions are precisely delineated by the Local Government Code, and reiterated in the case of Gambala vs. Agirita and Armeta (G.R. No. 1342-3, 20 July 1999).

Hence, any direct or indirect encroachment made by either of the aforesaid camps will give rise to a right of action against the "usurper."

Along that line, however, it is not accurate to conclude that because of the separation of powers principle, either group (executive and legislative) is already precluded from checking if laws or ordinances are being faithfully executed, implemented or observed. This is what the principle of check and balance means, to ensure transparency and good governance in the national and local settings. Hence, towards this end, either group can provide the respective oversight monitoring group, albeit, with strict observance with the separation of powers principle.

Accordingly, while we find the intent of establishing a LPMC in your municipality to be laudable, we view the substance of the proposed Ordinance to have the effect of degrading the principle of separation of powers, thus, an act of encroachment over the executive powers and functions.

Viewing the LPMC's composition alone would clearly reveal encroachment. It must be noted that while the local sanggunian has the authority to establish an oversight or monitoring body to ensure that the executive is properly implementing the programs duly