Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

September  _______  2003

MAYOR JULIE R. MONTON
Magdiwang, Romblon

Dear Mayor Monton:

This pertains to your letter requesting for legal opinion on what particular legislative enactment (ordinance or resolution) is required for the granting of franchise to operate and maintain cockfighting.

As per your letter and other attached documents, the Sangguniang Bayan granted to the New Magdiwang Cockers Club (NMCC) through a Resolution, a franchise to operate cockpit in your locality. You believe however that a Municipal Ordinance should be the proper and appropriate legislative action of the Sangguniang in granting said franchise.

Hence, your query.

In reply, may we invite your attention to Section 447 (3) of the Local Government Code (RA 7160) which provides, that:

"Section 447. Powers, Duties, Functions and Compensation.

(a) The Sangguniang bayan, as the legislative body of the municipality, shall enact ordinances, approve resolutions and appropriate funds for the general welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code and in the proper exercise of the corporate powers of the municipality as provided for under Section 2 of this Code, and shall:

xxx xxx xxx

(3) Subject to the provisions of Book II of this Code, grant franchises, enact ordinances authorizing the issuance of permits or licenses to enact ordinances levying taxes, fees and charges upon such conditions and for such purposes intended to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the municipality, and pursuant to this legislative authority shall:

(v) Any law to the contrary notwithstanding, authorize and license the establishment, operation, and maintenance of cockpits, and regulate cockfighting and commercial breeding of gamecocks: Provided, That existing rights should not be prejudiced."

xxx xxx xxx

Please take note that insofar as the granting of franchises is concerned, the afore-cited provisions do not specifically provide the particular action (whether ordinance or resolution) that the Sangguniang should enact. The requirement to enact ordinances mentioned in the said provision has particular reference to the issuance of permits or licenses, among others.

Now, of significance is the rule on the enactment of ordinances and resolutions. Paragraph (a) of Article 107 of the Rules and Regulations Implementing the Local Government Code provides that legislative actions of a general and permanent character shall be enacted in the form of ordinances while those which are temporary in character shall be passed in the form of resolutions. The latter includes matters relating to proprietary functions and to private concerns.

Note that franchises by its nature are special privileges intended to private persons or corporations. Being a privilege, it neither confers proprietary rights nor preclude the grantor to withdraw the same for cause. Therefore, the granting of franchise is merely temporary in the Sangguniang bayan in granting NMCC a franchise to operate cockpit activities is proper.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGELO T. REYES
Secretary

Legal:28:68/cga