Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
B. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

May 28, 2007

MR. EUTIQUIO F. MONREDONDO
Catagbacan-Handig
Loon, Bohol

Dear Mr. Monredondo:

This has reference to your earlier letter requesting for this Department's opinion on the legal possibility of implementing Executive Order No. 205, series of 1965 creating the Municipality of Tamblot out of the territory of the Municipality of Loon in the Province of Bohol.

In your letter, you represented that on November 22, 1965, the then President Diosdado Macapagal, pursuant to his power under Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code of 1917, issued Executive Order No. 205, series of 1965 creating the Municipality of Tamblot out of the territory of the Municipality of Loon in the Province of Bohol.

A month after or on December 24, 1965, in the case of Pelaez vs. Auditor General, L-23825 (15 SCRA 569), the Supreme Court declared Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code of 1917 to be unconstitutional and thus null and void as it was inconsistent with the 1935 Constitution. Accordingly, the Supreme Court also invalidated thirty-three (33) executive orders creating several municipalities since these executive orders were issued pursuant to Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code of 1917.

For unknown reasons and even if EO 205, series of 1965 creating the Municipality of Tamblot was not one among the 33 executive orders invalidated by the Supreme Court, the corporate existence of the Municipality of Tamblot did not materialize.

It is now your contention that, since EO 205, series of 1965 was not among those 33 executive orders invalidated by the Supreme Court in the aforementioned case, the creation of the Municipality of Tamblot still subsists and that the same may be implemented. In fact, in order to confirm your argument, you secured a copy from the Records Office of the Malacañang Palace a Certification to the effect that EO 205, series of 1965, has never been amended or revoked by any Presidential or administrative issuances.

We regret to inform you that we have a contrary view. It is our view that the Municipality of Tamblot created by EO 205, series of 1965 no longer subsists and that the same can no longer be implemented.

As already mentioned, Section 68 of the Administrative Code of 1917 was declared unconstitutional and thus invalidated by the Supreme Court in the case of Pelaez vs. Auditor General, supra. Please be informed that as to the effects of the declaration of unconstitutionality of a law, we follow the so-called orthodox view. Under the orthodox view, "an unconstitutional act is not a law; it confers no rights; it imposes no duties; it affords no protection; it creates no office; it is, in legal contemplation, as inoperative as if it had not been passed. It is therefore stricken from the statute books and considered never to have existed at all. Not only the parties but all persons are bound by the declaration of unconstitutionality, which means that no one may therefore invoke it nor may the courts be permitted to apply it in subsequent cases. It is, in other words, a total nullity" (p. 33, Statutory Construction, Agpalo, 4th edition). In fact this orthodox view is expressed in Article 7 of the Civil Code of the Philippines, which provides, in part, that "xxx when the courts declare a law to be inconsistent with the Constitution, the former shall be void and the latter shall govern xxx."

Applying the foregoing in your case, by virtue of the Supreme Court's declaration of unconstitutionality of Section 68 of the Administrative Code of 1917 in the Pelaez case, said provision could no longer be invoked so as to give validity to the latter cases. Hence, from the time of the declaration of constitutionality of Section 68 of the Administrative Code of 1917 in the Pelaez case, all executive orders issued pursuant to said provision, even if not included in the enumeration of the 33 executive orders that were declared invalid in the said case, would accordingly be invalidated.

Given the foregoing, it bears to stress that during your follow-up in this Department, you raised the issue on why is it that the Municipalities of Limasawa in the Province of Southern Leyte and San Isidro also in the Province of Bohol, both created through EO 193 and EO 214, series of 1965, respectively pursuant to Section 68 of the Administrative Code of 1917 are still existing up to present and that their corporate existence are recognized under the law? Why would the Municipality of Tamblot, which is similarly situated with the Municipalities of San Isidro and Limasawa, be treated differently so as the former's corporate existence could not be given effect?