OP SRTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVURNMET |
A, Pranciseo Gold" oncominium Ul, EDSA
cor. Mapagmanhel Diliman, Quezon City

lhl SEQRET ARY .
DILG OPINION tis), 2)
j 4 : C

ar

7-7 "0 ¢. REYNERA
» i ton, Federico S. Sandoval Il
*. House of Representatives
‘mrstiiartion: -lills, Diliman
Yuezon City

1

Dear Mr. Reynera:

This pertains to your letter requesting for the Department’s legal opinion: «1
larification on whether Municipal Ordinance No. 03-s-94 of Dasmarifias, Cavite, i:

and enforceable in view of the passage of Provincial Ordinance No. 2002-
> Drovince of Cavite.

You stated that the Province of Cavite came up with an Ordinance on 23
October 2002, providing that “no video or computer games arcades/shops
shall be operated within the 300-meter radius from any schools and
other educational institutions and from any church or any place cf
worship in the Province of Cavite. However, any municipal or city cout:
set up, through a form of a municipal/city Ordinance, their respectis °
restriction on the allowable distance of a computer/video games arca::

Haas

-2-

angguniang Panlungsod, with respect to cities; the Sangguniang Bayan, with voy.
‘municipalities; and the Sangguniang Barangay, with respect to the beicigea ss, sue
. legislative bodies below. It is clear, therefore, that the sanggunian cr all lets
rely exercising delegated legislative powers and, accordingly, the cult... 1.
, isa of such power is still with Congress. Precisely, it may be well to mute thar
ogress can at any time repeal or modify local ordinances. A corollary issue may thus
ww asked on whether or not a provincial ordinance can repeal a municipal ordinance.
We answer in the negative.

The power of the legislative body to repeal a particular measure pertains only
repeal of a measure which that scmie body earlier enacted or a me@cnu. 2 sched
J ower legislative body over which i cacrubes control, May we note in ihi ro gea :
vat the Sungguniang Panlaulawigan, tn the same state of things wilt: ties
wigguniang Bayan, is merely exercising a delegated legislative pow..
mgguniang Panlalawigan and the Sangguniang Bayan got their legishimee -,
. Congress. The Sangguniang Panlalawigan, therefore, has no conticl Guet igtec
Jougunians as the same is retained by Congress over all legislative bodies. What wus
4iven by Congress to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan is the power to review municipal
ordinances or resolutions approving the local development plans or public investment
pregrams pursuant to Section 56 of RA 7160, which cannot be stretched to include the
power to repeal. Accordingly, Municipal Ordinance No. 03-5-94 of the Sanggiunicius
sayan of Dasmarifas, Cavite, is still considered in force and = enforc wa '.
sotwithstanding the issuance of Provincial Ordinance No. 2002-003. Elis. -
-dinances can be given full force and effect in their respective territor..i os:
Yy we point out, however, that in case of violation of the provincia wie ws ye a
nnance, the violator can only be proceeded or prosecuted against for violution of
ither of the two ordinances. This is consistent with the constitutional mandate that

“no person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punishment for the same
uffense”.

To illustrate, for instance, a businessman would put up a computer video Gon.
. a distance of 250-meter radius from any church, then he can be prosecuted «..,. 0.
:- for violation of the provincial ordinance since it is within the 300-meter racic.
. . under the municipal ordinance since the distance is beyond the 206 i... ,
ir, however, the businessman would put up a computer video game witisn:
radius from any church, then, clearly, there is here a violation of the ..
wovlncial ordinances. However, in line with the constitutional guar ..
Juubie jeopardy, the businessman may only be prosecuted for violation either or ..
taicipal ordinance or the provincial ordinance.

May we, however, point out that the subject matter of the provincial ordinatic.
is the regulation only of video or computer games arcades/shops, while the subject
matter of the municipal ordinance is broader as it provides for regulation with respect
to video game centers, billiard hails, or any amusement of the same nature.

We hope We have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGEEO T. REYES
Secretary

Legal.43/La Bm _ Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
. AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
. . . At
cc: Director Leonilo B, Lariasa IN REPLYING, PLS CITE:

DILG Region 1V-A, Calderon Bldg. nT
EDSA, Diliman, Quezon Cy OUT

in

