Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

16 June 2006

VICE GOVERNOR BRIDGET CHIONGBIAN-HUANG
Provincial Capitol Building
Alabel, Sarangani Province

Dear Vice Governor Chiongbian-Huang:

This refers to your request for legal opinion on whether or not there is
a need for the Governor' signature on justifications for reimbursement of
purchases such as, but not limited to, books, food and newspaper
publications made by the Offices of the Vice Governor or Sangguniang
Panlalawigan, using their respective funds.

We submit a negative reply.

Per the express provision of Section 466 (a) (1) of the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), the Vice Governor shall be "the
presiding officer of the sangguniang panlalawigan and sign all warrants
drawn on the provincial treasury for all expenditures appropriated for the
operation of the sangguniang panlalawigan".

Likewise, the 2nd sentence of Section 344 of RA 7160 provides that:
"vouchers and payrolls shall be certified to and approved by the head of
the department or office who has administrative control of the fund
concerned, as to validity, propriety and legality of the claim involved".

Accordingly, since the Vice Governor and as Presiding Officer is the
head of both the offices of the Vice Governor and the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan, respectively, the Vice Governor has the authority to
approve disbursement vouchers for expenditures appropriated for its
operation.

Parenthetically, in the case of Ramon M. Atienza vs. Jose T.
Villarosa, G.R. No. 161081, 10 May 2005, the Supreme Court En Banc, in
supporting their declaration that the Vice Governor has the authority to
approve vouchers as abovestated, cited Section 39 of the Manual on the
New Government Accounting System for Local Government Units,
prepared by the Commission on Audit, which states that:

"SEC. 39. Approval of Disbursements.- Approval
of disbursements by the Local Chief Executive (LCE)
himself shall be required whenever local funds are
disbursed, except for regularly recurring administrative
expenses such as: payrolls for regular or permanent
employees, expenses for light, water, telephone and
telegraph services, remittances to government creditor
agencies such as GSIS, BIR, PHILHEALTH, LBP, DBP,
NPO, PS of the DBM and others, where the authority to
approve may be delegated. Disbursement vouchers for
expenditures appropriated for the operation of the
Sangguniang shall be approved by the provincial Vice
Governor, the city Vice Mayor or the municipal Vice
Mayor, as the case may be."

Thus, applying the foregoing to your instant query would lead us to
the inevitable conclusion that the Vice Governor, being the head of the
aforementioned offices and at the same time has administrative control of
the fund to be used, is the proper official to make the official justification
of the claims for reimbursement of monies used for the operation of the
sangguniang such as, but not limited to, the purchase of supplies and
equipment for the use of the offices of the Vice Governor and
Sangguniang Panlalawigan, in pursuit of their operation. Corollary thereto,
should the purchases be later on found to be not in accord with existing
laws, rules and regulations, it is the Vice Governor who shall be held
accountable therefor.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal:87/La

cc: The Regional Director
DILG Regional Office No. XI
Davao City