Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

18 May 2009

ATTY. HERMENIGILDO G. TRINIDAD, JR.
City Administrator
City of Tanauan, Batangas

Dear Atty. Trinidad:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking for enlightenment on the following issues, which we quoted in toto:

"We are writing to solicit the advice and/or legal opinion of your good office that can be observed by the Sangguniang Panlungsod when calling for appearances of city government officials to gather information or data; and for us to be apprised of the prohibitions or limitations when the nature of the inquiry is in pursuit of an investigation and/or in aid of legislation. Likewise, may we be enlightened as to what are the powers vested on the Sangguniang Panlungsod relative to the summons being made for these purposes."

We deem it proper to answer your queries jointly since they pertain to one subject matter.

At the outset, please be informed that all levels of the sanggunian, except the sangguniang barangay which exercises only legislative functions, are invested with dual functions, namely: (1) as a legislative body and (2) as a quasi-judicial body.

Legislative function refers to the power of local sanggunians to enact rules or regulations, which may be embodied in the form of an ordinance or a resolution of local application and having the force and effect of law. In the exercise of legislative powers, the sanggunian has no compulsory process to require persons to appear before it (Negros Oriental).

II Electric Cooperative vs. Sangguniang Panlungsod of Dumaguete City, 155 SCRA 421).

Nevertheless, may we invite your attention to Section 455 (b)(1)(iv) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), which provides and we quote:

"Section 455. Chief Executive; Powers, Duties and Compensation. xxx (b) For efficient, effective and economical governance the purpose of which is the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code, the city mayor shall:

(1) Exercise general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services, and activities of the city government and in this connection, shall: xxx xxx xxx

(iv) Initiate and propose legislative measures to the sangguniang panlungsod and as often as may be deemed necessary, provide such information and data needed or requested by said sanggunian in the performance of its legislative functions; xxx

Thus, while it is a settled jurisprudence that the Sangguniang Panlungsod cannot compel the attendance of any person before it in aid of legislation, it can however be safely stated that by invoking the aforementioned duty of the city mayor to furnish the necessary information and data to the sanggunian, the latter may exact that duty from the mayor by requiring the mayor or his duly authorized representative to be present in any session to present the information and data requested by the sanggunian.

It must be stressed however that if the person so required by the sanggunian is other than the mayor (e.g. a department head), please be reminded of the administrative hierarchy in the city government. The city mayor exercises control and supervision over all officials and employees in his local government unit save that of the sanggunian. As such, the mayor has the power to alter, reverse and modify the acts of his subordinates. In deference to the power of control of the mayor, it is just but proper and legal that a department head or any official of the city under the mayor's control should first secure the permission or approval of the mayor before any appearance is made by him/her before the sanggunian, in aid of legislation.