Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

19 February 2009

DIRECTOR PAISAL O. ABUTAZIL
DILG Regional Office No. IX
Pagadian City

Dear dir. Abutazil:

This refers to your request for a legal opinion as to whether or not the present Regional Peace and Order Council (RPOC) Chairperson can still act as such in a hold-over capacity pending appointment by the SILG of a new RPOC Chairperson.

Per your letter, the following facts were stated, to wit:

• On 19 August 2008, Executive Order No. 739, entitled: "Reorganizing the Peace and Order Council" was issued by HEPGMA.

• In accord with the said Executive Order, you convened the RPOC last 31 October 2008 with the reorganizational meeting presided by Zamboanga del Sur Governor Aurora Cerilles, but without having been appointed by the SILG.

• Last 05 January 2009, Executive Order No. 773 was issued for the purpose of further reorganizing the Peace and Order Council.

• Given this latest issuance, you are now contemplating of convening the RPOC soonest and to include the additional members mentioned in the said Executive Order. Corollary thereto, you will request Governor Cerilles to preside during the said meeting.

Hence, your query.

Before addressing your query, let it be stressed that Governor Cerilles' assumption as RPOC Chair during the 31 October 2008 reorganizational meeting was not in accordance with Section 1 (c) of Executive Order No. 739, s. 2008, which mandates that the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the RPOC shall be appointed by the SILG with the approval of the President of the Philippines from among the members of the council. Accordingly, Governor Cerilles' chairmanship of the RPOC is what could then be considered as ad interim or for the time being only.

Be that as it may, we now address your query in the affirmative.

Let it be stressed that Governor Cerilles' chairmanship may fall under the category of what is known as a de facto officer, which has been defined by jurisprudence as an "officer-in-fact under a color of known appointment or selection which is void because the officer was not eligible or because there was a want of power in the electing or appointing body, or by reason of some defect or irregularity in the exercise, such as ineligibility, want of power, defect being unknown to the public" (Sampayan vs. Daza, 213 SCRA 807).

Perforce, Governor Cerilles, while not yet being appointed as RPOC Chairman, may still validly be considered a de facto officer, which could give a semblance of authority for her to be considered in a hold-over capacity.

On a final note, please be informed that this opinion is being issued to address the urgency to settle the peace and order situation of the region. May we thus enjoin you to facilitate the process wherein the SILG may already appoint the RPOC Chairman, whose appointment is to be approved by HEGPMA in order to avoid adverse consequences.

We hope we have guided you accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Assistant Secretary

Legal:87