REPUBLIC OF THE PHILT

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND 1
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
Diliman, Quezon City

OFACE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FC

HON. WILHELMINO M. SY-ALVARADO
Vice Governor

Provincial Capitol Building

Malolos City, Bulacan

Dear Sir:

This refers to your two (2) letters reques
issues thereat which we herein consolidated, viz:

1. Is an appropriation ordinance enad
Panlalawigan to re-align or revert (ilil
Services (PS) and Operating Exper
services of the Office of the Vice-G
which are not yet savings or unexpen
2007 to various offices under the Office

Whether the Memorandum dated 13 $
Office of the Governor of Bulacan, add
Sangguniang Panlalawigan, through
Governor, requesting to earmark
65,376,169.20) not in conflict with
Government Code (LGC) of 19917?

As to your first issue, please be informed 4
upon the validity of a duly enacted Ordinance, si
the reason that it is a matter for the courts to res«
the presumption of validity although the question
judicial inquiry.’

* DOJ Opinion No. 123 s 1985, citing Victorias Milling Co. Inc.
SCRA 192

IR LO

t

PPINES |
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
or. Mapagmahal St.,

ing for

ted by

CAL GOVERNMENT

NLG oem ac 87 5 sto
October 05, 2007

our legal opinion on the

the Sanggunian

pat) fu
ded bal
2 of the
peptem

ressed

section

of its r

v Mun. 0

hat this
ich as the subject Ordinance, for
pive. An ordinance carries with it

nds from Personal

ses (MOOE) and other
overnor/Presiding Officer

ances for the year
‘Governor VALID?

ber 2007 from the

to the Office of the

the Office of the Vice-
the amount of (Php

336 of the Local

Department cannot pass

easonableness is open to

f Victorias, Negros Occidental, 25

Nonetheless, only for academic discussic
observations which we deemed are proper to fo
linchpins of your query, thus:

bn, May we note the following
r we believe that these are the

1. Is “paglilipat” in the aforesaid Ordinar
realignment, augmentation or reversion

nce No! 2007-04 means
of funds?

2. Is Ordinance No. 2007-04 indeed a supplemental budget?

|

If said “paglilipat” means realignment, it is our opinion that the subject
Ordinance violated the law? which provides that|budgetary realignment may be
had in times of public calamity and should comply with the certification
requirement indicating therein the sources of funds available for appropriations,
as certified under oath by the local treasurer and local accountant and attested by
the local chief executive, and the various items of appropriations affected and the
reason for the change. If said “paglilipat” mean augmentation, the same also
violated the provision of the law’ which states tha augmentation of funds may be
done only within respective offices from savings) in other items within the same
expense class of respective appropriations. Finally, if the same means reversion,
as indicated in said Ordinance, it failed to comply with Section 322 of the LGC
which provides “unexpended balances of appropriation authorized in the annual

appropriation ordinance shall revert to the unappropriated surplus of the general

fund at the end of the fiscal year xxx”. (Emphasis

Furthermore,
appropriation, it should have complied with:

Section 321 of the LGC, which in pa
ordinance providing for a supplemental
except (a) when supported by fund

if Ordinance No. 2007-0

The requirement of review with the De
Management pursuant to Section 326 a

ours) |

4 is indeed a_ supplemental

spartment of Budget and
f the LGC of 1991.

|
rt provides that “xxx, no
budget shall be enacted,
5 actually available* as

*Section 321 of the LGC
3 Section 336 of the LGC

““Funds actually available” shall mean the amount of n
the local treasurer at any given point during the fiscal
estimated income collection for that point in the year. Th
realized income exceeds estimated income as of any giv
fiscal year. Funds are likewise deemed actually availab
purpose, Savings refer to portions or balances as of any
programmed or allotted appropriation which remain free
which are still available after the satisfactory completion
abandonment of the work, activity or purpose for wh

noney actually collected as certified by
year which is over and above the
us, funds are actually available when
en day, month of quarter of the said
@ when |there are savings. For this
given point in the fiscal year of any

Le .
pf any obligation or encumbrance and

of the unavoidable discontinuance or
ich the | appropriation was originally

certified by the local treasurer or (b) by!

new revenue sources® or

(c) in times of public calamity.”

Section 336 of the LGC of 1991, whi

Appropriated Funds and Savings - |

exclusively for the purpose for Vv
appropriated. No ordinance shall be
transfer of appropriation from one item

Parenthetically, there seems to be incon
and 336 of the LGC. Allow us then to reconcile
speaks of annual budget while the latter provi
funds and savings. Hence, as a general rule, r
enacted if the local chief executive concern
executive budget to the sanggunian’ or after the
authorized by the sanggunian’. However, this ru
when (a) the supplemental budget is supported
certified by the loca! treasurer or by new revenue
calamity. Otherwise, if these two (2) exceptions
the LGC shall apply. Thus, if there is already an
one of the above exceptions is not present, purs
be available exclusively for the specific purp
appropriated and no ordinance shall be pass
appropriation from one item to another. In thi
augmentation® of fund but only within respective
same expense class of respective appropriations.

ch provides that “ Use of
Funds shall be available
which they have been
passed authorizing any
to another.”
npatibility between Section 321
the two provisions. The former
des for|the use of appropriated
no supplemental budget may be
ed has already submitted the
annual budget shall have been
le admits of two exceptions, i. e.
1 by funds actually available as
> Sources; or (b) there is a public
are not availing, Section 336 of
appropriation ordinance and any
uant to Section 336, funds shall
pse for, which they have been
ed authorizing any transfer of
is situation, what is allowed is
offices and from savings within
(Emphasis supplied)

authorized, or which result from un-obligated compens
vacant positions and leaves of absences without pay.(Budg

° Per Budget Operations Manual for LGUs, “New Revenu
not otherwise considered during the preparation and en
revenue measures include ordinance passed by the Sang
the annual budget had already been enacted into law wh
fines or penalties, or which raising existing local taxes, a
revenue sources also include new or higher remittances,
from the National Government or from government corpo
not been included in the estimate of income which served

® Section 321 of the LGC
? Budget Operations Manual for LGUs by the Joint Resoluti
8 article 454, IRR of the LGC states “Augmentation im

item, project, activity or purpose with an appropria
subsequent evaluation of needed resources is determined

ation and related costs pertaining to
et Operations Manual for LGUs)

e Sources” refers to money measures
actment|of the annual budget. Such
gunian during the fiscal year but after
ich imposes new taxes, charges, fees,
harges, fees, fines or penalties. Such
tontributions, subsidies or grants in aid
rations and private entities which have
as basis for the annual budget.

on of the DBM and COA, p. 18
|

plies the jexistence in the budget of an
tion which upon implementation or

to be deficient”.

As to your second issue, it is our opinion that subject Memorandum dated
13 September 2007 issued by the Governor, which requests for the earmarking
“paglalaan” of (Php 65,376,169.20) from the Office of the Vice-Governor for the
different offices under the executive department|of said Province should comply
with the provision of Section 336 of the LGC. entence number two (2) thereof
provides that “the local chief executive or the presiding officer of the Sanggunian
concerned may, by ordinance, be authorized) to augment any item in the
approved annual budget for their respective offices from savings in other items
within the same expenses class of their respective appropriations”. Therefore,
limitations on the augmentation of funds under this provision are: (1) it must be
taken from savings within the same expense [class (i.e. PS, MOOE, Capital
Outlay) from the respective appropriations; and (2) must only be for the
respective offices of the aforementioned departments of the LGUs.
|

Assuming that the sources of funds for the supplemental budget are
indeed savings as defined herein and as provided for in the Budget Operations
Manual for LGUs, it is still wanting of a certification by the Local Treasurer as to
the availability of the same. And the subsequent supplemental appropriation
ordinance thereof should be subjected for review by the Department of Budget
and Management as provided for by law.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

7 in
AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary yi”

Legai/10

cc: Director Josefina Castilla-Go
DILG Regional Office No. 03
San Fernando City, Pampanga

