Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

A. Francisco Gold Condominium Il Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahalt St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG OPINION WO 12S. 20090

19 February 2009

ATTY. ANA LIZA A. PERALTA
MR. ARSENIO A. MAURICIO, JR.
Sangguniang Bayan Members
San Marcelino, Zambales

MR. DANIEL A. FABUNAN
Punong Barangay
Barangay Lucero
San Marcelino, Zambales

Dear Aity. Peralta and Messrs. Mauricio and Fabunan:

This has reference to your earlier separate letters, which we herein
consolidated, considering that your queries ail boil down to one issue, that
is, on the validity of the Resolution passed by the Sangguniang Bayan of
San Marcelino, Zambales imposing unto PB Fabunan a 60-day preventive
suspension.

Per your letters, an administrative complaint for conduct
unbecoming a barangay official was filed against PB Fabunan before the
Sangguniang Bayan. Thereafter, according to the letter of Atty. Peralta, the
issue as to whether a preventive suspension should be imposed against
PB Fabunan was submitted for votation by the Sangguniang Bayan. Where
eleven (11) members of the Sangguniang Bayan were present in the
session, the result of the votation in the Sangguniang Bayan was as
follows: Yes-4; No-3; Inhibited-2; and Abstained-1.

On the other hand, upon reading the letter of Sangguniang Bayan
Member Mauricio, we noticed that the issue that was submitted for votation
by the Sangguniang Bayan was rather the duration of the preventive
suspension to be imposed against PB Fabunan. The result of the votation
in the Sangguniang Bayan was as follows: for 60 days-4; for 30 days-3;
abstained-1; and inhibited-2.

Be that as it may, it is however undisputed that the Sangguniang
Bayan has approved Resolution No. 2008-048 recommending a sixty (60)-
day preventive suspension against PB Fabunan. Accordingly, the
Municipal Mayor thereat imposed the preventive suspension against PB
Fabunan. Subsequently, however, the validity of said imposition as well as
the Resolution of the Sangguniang Bayan recommending a sixty (60)-day
preventive suspension were questioned by PB Fabunan. In fact, this utter

v7 2- .
;

dissent and/or non-recognition of PB Fabunan was succinctly quoted in the
letter of Sangguniang Bayan Member Mauricio, thus: “With due respect, I
write to let you kuow, that I am not recognizing the legitimacy of your order
placing me under Preventive suspension because the same is anchored in an
illegitimate resolution passed by the Sangguniang Bayan of San Marcelino —
fesolution No. 2008-048 which legislative measure has no force and effect under
the law, since the same was not approved by the majority of the members of said
Sanggunian.” By reason thereof, according to the letter of Atty. Peralta, the
Mayor filed before the Sangguniang Bayan an administrative case for
Grave Misconduct, Insubordination, etc. against PB Fabunan. During a
series of follow-ups made, it was represented that PB Fabunan has also
filed a case before the regular court assailing the validity of Sangguniang
Bayan Resolution No. 2008-048 recommending a sixty (60)-day preventive
suspension against him. Hence, your query.

In reply thereto, please be informed that this Department is bereft of
any authority to declare invalid or illegal any legislative measure passed by
local sanggunians such as Sangguniang Bayan Resolution No. 2008-048
recommending a sixty (60)-day preventive suspension against PB Fabunan
enacted by the Sangguniang Bayan, that Municipality. Only courts can
make such declaration upon filing of a proper action before the proper
forum. Since, as represented, there is already a case filed before the
regular court questioning the validity of the subject Sangguniang Bayan
Resolution, the issue is already within the domain of the judicial branch of
the government. This Department, which is under the executive branch, is
no longer at good liberty to render an opinion on the issue as we might be
accused of violating the sub-judice rule, which is considered as
contumacious act against the court.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
vnerseeree ae

Ce: Director Renato L. Brion
DILG-Region II!
San Fernando City, Pampanga

Legal/17

