Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

P.D. OPINION NO. 2 S. 2005
25 January 2005

MAYOR GLORIOSO R. MARTINEZ
Agoncillo, Batangas

Dear Mayor Martinez:

This refers to your letter requesting our legal opinion on the position
taken by the Sangguniang Bayan of Agoncillo pursuant to its Resolution No.
33-04 expressing their position that charging of cash tickets is a violation of
RA 7160 (Local Government Code of 1991).

A reading of the aforesaid Sangguniang Bayan Resolution would reveal
that the Sangguniang Bayan recommended to you to put an end to the
imposition of cash tickets on goods carried into, out or passing through the
Municipality of Agoncillo as the same not only violates Section 133,
prescribing the limitation on local taxation fee and charge imposition, but
also Section 130, both of the Local Government Code, for being in restraint
of trade, which is a clear violation of the Local Government Code of 1991
and inconsistent with the Local Revenue Code of 1991 and, therefore, no
basis and is considered unlawful and illegal.

The Sangguniang Bayan is also apprehensive on the manner of
collecting the cash tickets through a checkpoint at Barangay Sta. Cruz of the
same municipality in view of the pronouncement of the President, Gloria
Macapagal-Arroyo, that all checkpoints, for the purpose of charging fees or
tolls, shall be eliminated considering the ill-effect on the economy being in
restraint of trade.

At the outset, may it be emphasized that the Mayor, on the one hand,
and the Vice-Mayor and Sangguniang Bayan Members, on the other,
performs separate and distinct functions under the Local Government Code.
The Mayor is charged with the enforcement and execution of laws and
ordinances as the Chief Executive of the local government unit concerned.

On the other hand, the Vice-Mayor and the Sangguniang Bayan Members are
constituted under Section 48 of the same Code as the legislative body of the
local government unit and thus perform legislative functions which pertain
to the enactment of ordinances.

Based on the principle of separation of powers and functions, there
can be no encroachment with the other's duties, powers and functions, such
that the Mayor cannot legislate an ordinance, neither can the Sangguniang
enforce and execute ordinances. Their respective duties and functions are
precisely delineated by the Local Government Code, and reiterated in the
case of Gamboa vs. Aguirre and Araneta (G.R. No. 134213, 20 July 1999).

With that in mind, we shall now come first to Municipal Ordinance
Nos. 07-2001 and 06-96, the former providing for the imposition of cash
ticket fees on transportation of hogs, fish and other items outside the
Municipality of Agoncillo in the course of business or trade, and the latter
providing for the imposition of permit fees for those transporting bamboo in
line with the regulation of fish cage industry. The Sangguniang Bayan is
apprehensive and questioned the establishment of a checkpoint in Barangay
Sta. Cruz wherein payments are collected for the cash tickets on all goods
coming into, going out or passing through the same.

In reply now to your query, in view of the aforesaid separation of
powers and functions by the Mayor and the Sangguniang Bayan, it is well to
note that the manner and procedure in enforcing an ordinance is best left to
the sound judgment of the Chief Executive, it being his mandated function
under the Local Government Code. Accordingly, if the ordinance did not
provide for the manner and procedure by which said ordinance is to be
enforced or implemented, the enforcement thereof is within the prerogative
of the Mayor to determine. Hence, if the Mayor, based on his best
judgment, believes that the most efficient way of collecting the payments of
the cash tickets is through a checkpoint, the same is legally permissible but
only for the collection of cash tickets on items covered by Ordinance Nos.
07-2001 and 06-96. Hence, other goods passing through the checkpoint
which are outside the coverage of both ordinances cannot be the subject of
cash ticketing in the absence of another ordinance covering such other
goods by that municipality.

Neither can checkpoints be established by LGUs to collect "Road
Users Tax".