¥
a
£
———
4 i

Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT ©F THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium Il Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY
UILG GPINIGN RO 2)_ 3, acue

May 8, 2009

CEZAR H. TAWAGON
Barangay Busak, Lipmanan
Camarines Sur

4407

Dear Mr. Tawagon:

This refers to your letter seeking reconsideration and reversal of our Opinion No.
92, Series of 2008, which was a response to your previous letter-query.

To recall, we stated in the aforesaid opinion that the sangguniang bayan may
establish a waterworks system only in accordance with PD 198 but has no power to
create a corporate entity that will operate the waterworks system. In support thereof, we
cited the ruling of our Supreme Court in Feliciano vs. Commission on Audit [G.R. No.
147402, 14 January 2004], which, in turn, cited among others Section 447 (5) (vii) of the
Local Government Code of 1991. Obviously not satisfied with the adverse opinion
insofar as you are concerned, and apparently under the impression that our opinions are
binding to all courts, you now seek a reversal of the subject opinion invoking the doctrine
that ours is a democratic and republican country.

At the outset, please be informed that our opinions are not binding to the courts
of law. Instead, it is the other way around. Being part of the executive branch of the
government, we are primarily tasked to implement laws only while it is the judicial
branch that is primarily tasked to interpret them. This means ihat while we may
render opinion regarding a certain law, our opinion thereon is never binding to any
court of law. At most, our opinion only has a persuasive effect. Thus, if a court of law,
especially our Supreme Court, has already interpreted a particular law through a
decision it rendered in a case, we are bound thereby and obliged to observe them in our
subsequent actions involving substantially sirnilar issues and/or facts.

With the foregoing, we regret to inform you that we stick to our previous opinion
as aforementioned because we find no cogent reason to deviate therefrom. As has
been said, our Opinion No. 92, Series of 2008 was mainly based on the decision of our
Supreme Court in Feliciano vs. Commission on Audit. Significantly, said decision
resolved, among others, an issue substantially similar to what you have confronted us.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADE
Undersecretary Ty
\s/28/md 4

