REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II EDSA Cor. Mapagkamahal St.
Imus City, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG CPNIN 10 33 8 2005
May 18, 2005

MR. VICTORIO C. OSABEL
Municipal Vice Mayor
Sto. Niño, Western Samar

Dear Vice Mayor Osabel:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal advice and assistance on: (1) whether the Municipal Mayor has the sole authority to sign and approve the travel order intended for the members of the Sangguniang Bayan and checks intended for the Vice Mayor and Sangguniang Bayan Members, and, (2) whether a fifth class municipality can put up an extension office for the Mayor, Accountant, Budget Officer and Treasurer outside its municipal jurisdiction.

It is your understanding that you, as the Head of the Office of the Sangguniang Bayan are clothed by law with the authority to sign all warrants drawn on the municipal treasury for all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the Sangguniang Bayan pursuant to Section 445 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (R.A. 7160).

Unfortunately however, your Municipal Mayor Silvestre J. Acilo, refused to sign your travel order for the 15th Annual Convention of the Vice Mayors League held in Manila.

Also, you advised us when you visited our office, that the extension office you were referring to in your letter-query was, an extension office of the Municipal Mayor, Municipal Accountant, Municipal Budget Officer and the Municipal Treasurer. Hence, your queries.

In reply to your first query, please be informed that we already had the occasion to respond to a similar query concerning the functions of the Municipal Mayor regarding the signing of the travel order of the Sangguniang Officials and their employees and which we hereunto pertinently quote as follows:

"If the Vice Mayor's travel and/or that of the Members of the Sangguniang Bayan is chargeable to the general fund of the municipality, the approval of the Mayor is discretionary because under Section 444 (b)(1)(xv) of the Local Government Code of 1991, the Municipal Mayor, being the chief executive who exercise general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services and activities of the municipal government, is given the sole prerogative to authorize official trips outside of the municipality of municipal officials and employees. This is part and parcel of the executive function of the municipal mayor."

On the other hand, if such travel is chargeable to the sangguniang funds, the recommendation of the Vice Mayor is necessary and the approval of the Mayor becomes a ministerial function because under Section 445 (a) (1) of the same code, the Vice Mayor is given the authority to sign all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the sangguniang bayan. The Sanggunian, through the Vice-Mayor, is actually acting as a legislative body of the local government unit (LGU) and operating on a separate budget though forming part of the entire budget of the municipality. As such, it becomes a duty on the part of the municipal mayor to authorize, including the issuance of corresponding travel order thereto to members of the sangguniang bayan and its employees whenever the vice mayor had already issued his/her prior recommendation and had already signed the warrant drawn on the municipal treasury for all expenditures necessary for such official travel"(DILG Opinion No. 5, 2004).

In reply to your second query, we answer in the negative.

Please be informed that Section 444 (c) of the Local Government Code of 1991 requires the incumbent municipal mayor to hold office at the municipal hall. To our view, this is imperative in order for the said official to effectively, efficiently and economically perform his duties and responsibilities to his constituents, as mandated under the law. More importantly, the Mayor's presence in his area of jurisdiction is indispensable, in order for the latter to be aware and be responsive to any unexpected events and situation affecting the general welfare of his municipality. On the same token, considering that the basic function of the appointive officials you mentioned is to assist and coordinate with the mayor in ensuring the proper management of the political and administrative affairs of the municipality, it is but imperative also, that they should likewise hold their office in the municipal hall.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGEL T. REYES
Secretary

LS:LD:16/Gz
cc:Dir. William C. Paler
DILG Region VIII