Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

3) 1 L)  0  9 0 1 0 0 67 - 5  2 0 1 7
23 August 2007

VICE MAYOR ERLINDA B. WENCESLAO
Caba, La Union

Dear Vice Mayor Wenceslao:

This pertains to your request for legal opinion, as contained in a letter dated 09 August 2007, on issues relative to the conduct of administrative investigation in the sanggunian. Specifically, you posited the following queries, viz:

1. Whether or not the 29 October 2007 Barangay and Sangguniang Kabataan elections is included within the coverage of "any local elections" that will cause moratorium on the conduct of administrative investigation during the ninety (90) day period before such scheduled date;

2. Whether the Sangguniang Bayan is prevented from undertaking clarificatory meetings with the respondent, complainant and their respective witnesses during the aforesaid ninety day period, and whether decision making and its enforcement are parts of the administrative investigation process;

3. Whether or not the Sangguniang Bayan of your municipality was correct when it terminated its investigation and ordered the submission of position papers to arrive at resolution, despite of the respondent's clamor to have a formal hearing; and

4. Whether or not the election period in this forthcoming barangay elections comprises ninety (90), sixty (60) or fifteen (15) days prior to 29 October 2007.

In reply to your first query, it is the stand of this Office that the proscription on the conduct of administrative investigation within ninety (90) days immediately prior to any local election includes barangay and sangguniang kabataan elections. This is undisputedly clear from the law itself as the term "local election" is confined to the regular election of elective local officials and made to apply in all electoral exercises under

the effective control and supervision of the Commission on Elections (COMELEC). Thus, the Supreme Court in one case held that the term "local regular election" must be confined to the regular election of elective local officials as distinguished from the regular election of national officials where such local officials include the Provincial Governors, Vice-Governors of provinces, Mayors and Vice-mayors of cities and municipalities, members of the sanggunians of provinces, cities and municipalities, punong barangays and members of the sangguniang barangay and the elective regional officials of the ARMM. Clearly, therefore, the scheduled barangay election on 29 October 2007 will perforce prohibit the conduct of any administrative investigation by the sangguniang bayan during the prescribed ban period as election for barangay falls within the purview of any local election within the contemplation of the Local Government Code of 1991 and its IRR.

Kabataan elections. This was the categorical pronouncement of the High Court in Associated Labor Unions vs. Letrondo-Montejo where it was ruled that election for members of the SK may properly be considered a local election and the day on which it is held to be a holiday. The ratiocination in this case is worth emphasizing, thus:

"The Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) is part of the local government structure. The Local Government Code (RA 7160) creates in every barangay a Sangguniang Kabataan composed of a chairman, seven (7) members, a secretary, and a treasurer. The chairman and the seven members are elected by the Katipunan ng mga Kabataan, which is composed of citizens of the Philippines residing in the barangay for at least six months, who are between the ages of 15 and 21 and who are registered as members. The chairman of the SK is an ex-officio member of the Sangguniang Barangay with the same powers, duties, functions and privileges as the regular members of the Sangguniang Barangay. The president of the Pederasyon ng mga Sangguniang Kabataan, which is composed of the SK Chairman of the sangguniang kabataan of the barangays in the province, city or municipality, is an ex-officio member of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, Sangguniang Panlungsod, and Sangguniang Bayan."

With respect to your second question, it is our view that clarificatory meetings with the complainant and respondent, together with their respective counsels, are included within the scope of the ban on investigation within ninety days before any local election, as long as these procedures form part of the formal investigation proper. Thus, the prohibition on the sangguniang bayan to investigate within the 90-day period prior to the conduct of any local election is again emphasized. Time and again, this Office would like to clarify that investigation in administrative disciplinary action of the sanggunian is only specific to constitute that period where the parties are required to present their inculpatory or exculpatory evidence exclusive of the preliminary and post investigatory incidents transpiring, including the writing of the decision after the investigation, examination or inquiry have been concluded.