Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

14 July 2008
DILG OPINION NO. 55, S. 2008

MR. ADONIS H. REBADULLA
Sangguniang Panlalawigan Secretary
Provincial Capitol Building
Catarman, Northern Samar

Dear Mr. Rebadulla:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on
this aforequoted query: "Whether or not the resignation of the
Honorable Alfredo S. Dulay, Sr. has become effective and operative,
and that he is considered resigned as member of the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan of Northern Samar?"

Per your letter and other attached documents submitted to this
Office, the following are the antecedent facts, viz:

• Mr. Alfredo S. Dulay, Sr. was elected as Member of the Sangguniang
  Panlalawigan, that Province, during the May 2007 Synchronized National
  and Local Elections;
• On 07 December 2007, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Northern Samar
  unanimously adopted Sangguniang Panlalawigan Resolution No. 59, series
  of 2007, entitled "Resolution Recommending Madame Carmen A. Dulay as
  Replacement of the Honorable Alfredo S. Dulay, Sr. in the Event his
  Position as Member of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Northern Samar
  is Rendered Permanently Vacant";
• On 14 January 2008, SP Member Dulay delivered a privilege speech during
  the session of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in which he announced his
  intended resignation due to health reason;
• On 21 January 2008, SP Member Dulay tendered a letter of resignation to
  Vice-Governor Antonio P. Lucero, his resignation made effective 21
  January 2008;
• On 22 January 2008, Vice-Governor Antonio P. Lucero accepted SP Member
  Dulay's resignation effective at the close of office hours on 21 January 2008;
• On 28 January 2008, SP Member Dulay attended the session of the
  Sangguniang Panlalawigan and delivered a speech to withdraw his letter of
  resignation;
• In the same session, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan unanimously granted
the request of SP Member Dulay to withdraw his earlier tendered
resignation;
• On 13 February 2008, Governor Raul Daza wrote a Memorandum to Vice-
  Governor Lucero and the Members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan
  expressing his view that the resignation of SP Member Dulay has become
effective at the close of the office hours on 21 January 2008 and that the
withdrawal by him of his letter of resignation on 28 January 2008 has no
legal effect;
• On 26 February 2008, Vice-Governor Lucero, in reply to the Memorandum,
opined that the resignation of SP Member Dulay on 21 January 2008 has
never been completed and therefore never became effective as it was
promptly withdrawn by him on 28 January 2008.

Hence, your query.

In reply thereto, we answer in the negative. Please allow us to
illustrate how we arrived to this conclusion.

In the case of Ortiz vs. COMELEC (162 SCRA 812), the Supreme
Court defined resignation as the "act of giving up or the act of an
  officer by which he declines his office and renounces the further
  right to use it. It is an expression of the incumbent in some form,
  express or implied, of the intention to surrender, renounce, and
  relinquish the office and the acceptance by competent and lawful
authority".

In the case of Sangguniang Bayan of San Andres, Catanduanes vs.
Court of Appeals (G.R. No. 11883, 16 January 1998), the Supreme Court
held that to constitute a complete and operative resignation from public
office, there must be: (a) an intention to relinquish a part of the term; (b) an
act of relinquishment; and (c) an acceptance by the proper authority.

Moreover, in Punzalan vs. Mendoza (140 SCRA 153), the Court held
implicitly, but no less clearly, that the effectivity of a public official's
resignation depends not on such much on its terms, e.g. "effective at the
pleasure of the President", or "at a particular time or on the
happening of a particular contingency, but as a legal proposition,
on acceptance thereof by the proper authority. For quite obviously,
such appropriate authority can disregard the terms of the
official's resignation, and as easily reject it as accept it ..." (cited in
Joson vs. Nario III, 187 SCRA 453).

Acceptance by the proper authority is required by reason of Article
238 of the Revised Penal Code, which makes abandonment of office crimi-