Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

01 June 2009

DIRECTOR MERLLO Q. LIMBARO
City Director
DILG-Region XI
City Government Operations Office
Rm. 16, City Hall
Davao City

Dear Director Limbaro:

This has reference to your earlier letter requesting for a prompt and immediate legal opinion regarding the "irrevocable resignation" previously tendered by Mayor Rodrigo R. Duterte as deputized representative of the National Police Commission (NAPOLCOM) in order to give the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) a free hand and undue influence over the on-going public inquiry/investigation on the alleged extra-judicial killing in Davao City.

Hence, you want to seek guidance on the following issues, which we quoted in toto:

"(1) Can the Mayor resign/abdicate his being a NAPOLCOM deputy in the matter of operational supervision and control over the PNP?

(2) If no, can he be cited for dereliction or abandonment of duty under the Local Code and RA 6975 as amended by RA 8551?"

On your part, you entertained the idea that the Mayor can abdicate or relinquish his deputation in conjunction to Section 65 of RA 8551. According to you, since deputation can be withdrawn by the grantor, which is the NAPOLCOM, there is no reason that same grant of authority may be waived or formally relinquished to the grantor who in return shall automatically exercise such function of administrative control and operational supervision over the police pursuant to its mandate under Section 14 of RA 6975, as amended. Your view was further bolstered by the absence of a provision under RA 6975 and RA 8551 providing for the resignation of the NAPOLCOM deputized representative.

With all due respect to your view, we have a different stand on the matter.

Section 14 (a) of Republic Act 6975, otherwise known as the "Department of the Interior and Local Government Act of 1990" provides that the NAPOLCOM shall exercise administrative control over the Philippine National Police. This was thereafter amended by Republic Act 8551, otherwise known as the "Philippine National Police Reform and Reorganization Act of 1998" when it is provided under Section 5 therein that the NAPOLCOM shall exercise administrative control and operational supervision over the Philippine National Police.

Corollarily, governors and mayors are deputized under Section 51 of RA 6975 as representatives of the NAPOLCOM in their respective territorial jurisdiction. In fact, this duty of the local chief executives, the city mayors in particular, is reiterated under Section 455 (b)(2)(v) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), thus:

"Section 455. Chief Executive; Powers, Duties and Compensation. xxx

(b) For efficient, effective and economical governance for the purpose of which is the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code, the city mayor shall: xxx.

(2) Enforce all laws and ordinances relative to the governance of the city and in the exercise of the appropriate corporate powers provided for under Section 22 of this Code, implement all approved policies, programs, projects, services and activities of the city and, in addition to the foregoing, shall: xxx.

(v) Act as the deputized representative of the National Police Commission, formulate the peace and order plan of the city and upon its approval, implement the same; and as such