Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

8LG UPMN8T 70 S. 2517
22 August 2007

DIRECTOR QUIRINO M. LIBUNAO
DILG Regional Office No. 10
Upper Carmen, Cagayan de Oro City

Dear Dir. Libunao:

This refers to your letter requesting for our opinion on who has the authority to fill up the permanent vacancies in the Sanggunian arising out from the recent conversion of the Municipality of El Salvador, Province of Misamis Oriental, into a city.

As represented, the Municipality of El Salvador was converted into a component city by virtue of RA 9435. On 27 June 2007, the required plebiscite was conducted and the conversion was duly ratified by the people affected. As a result, the regular membership of the Sanggunian Bayan, now Sanggunian Panlungsod, was increased from eight (8) regular members to ten (10). You now seek our opinion on who has the authority to fill up the two permanent vacancies to complete the regular members of the now Sanggunian Panlungsod. Interestingly, in your letter-query, you are of the view that it will be the Governor concerned who should fill up the vacancies and not the President of the Philippines.

In reply thereto, Sections 44 and 45 of RA 7160, insofar as pertinent, provide that:

"SEC. 44. Permanent Vacancies in the Offices of the Governor, Vice Governor, Mayor and Vice Mayor.- (a) xxx Subsequent vacancies in the said office shall be filled automatically by the other sanggunian members according to their ranking as defined herein. xxx For purposes of this Chapter, a permanent vacancy arises when an elective local official fills a higher vacant office, refuses to assume office, fails to qualify, dies, is removed from office, voluntarily resigns, or is otherwise permanently incapacitated to discharge the functions of his office. xxx"

"SEC. 45. Permanent Vacancies in the Sanggunian.- (a) Permanent vacancies in the sanggunian where automatic succession provided above do not apply shall be filled by appointment in the following manner: xxx (2) The governor, in the case of the sanggunian panlungsod of component cities and the sanggunian bayan. xxx"

A careful examination of Section 45 of RA 7160 (The Local Government Code), which vests unto the Governor the power to appoint in filling up permanent vacancies in the Sanggunian Panlungsod would show that said power is available only in a situation where Sections 44 and 45 of RA 7160 will complement each other, meaning, after applying the rule of succession provided for under Section 44 due to permanent vacancies caused by the instances enumerated under the last paragraph of the same section, and the rule on automatic succession does not anymore apply as there are nobody to succeed anymore in the remaining last ranking position/s, the Governor is now empowered to issue the appointment to complete the regular membership in the Sanggunian.

Clearly, therefore, the situation in filling up the permanent vacancies in the Sanggunian Panlungsod of El Salvador City due to the increase of regular members in the Sanggunian as a consequence of its conversion, is not within the contemplated situation under Section 45 of RA 7160.

The vacuum, however, should not be left unaddressed and, therefore, we have to find some constitutional provisions that would remedy the situation. In this regard, may we point out Section 16, Chapter 7 of the 1987 Constitution, and we quote:

"SEC. 16. The President shall nominate and, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments, appoint the heads of the executive departments, ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, or officers of the armed forces from the rank of colonel or naval captain, and other officers whose appointments are vested in him in this Constitution. He shall also appoint all other officers of the Government whose appointments are not otherwise provided by law, and those whom he may be authorized by law to appoint. The Congress may, by law, vest the appointment of other officers lower in rank in the President alone, in the courts, or in the heads of departments, agencies, commissions, or boards. xxx"

It bears to emphasize that there are two sets of officials whom the President may appoint, namely: those which would require the consent of the Commission on Appointments, and those which does not anymore require said consent. As to appointments falling under the categories of heads of executive departments: ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, or officers of the armed forces from the rank of colonel or naval captain, and other officers whose appointments are vested in the Constitution, the consent of the Commission on Appointments is required. With regard to "all other officers of the government whose appointments are not otherwise provided by law to appoint", the consent of the Commission on Appointments is not anymore required.

Thus, we are of the view that considering the peculiarity of the permanent vacancies resulting in the conversion of the Municipality of El...