Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE ACTING SECRETARY

M.0 OPINION NO. 12 S. 2006

February 21, 2006

VICE MAYOR ROLANDO O. ESTURAS
Capalonga, Camarines Norte

Dear Vice Mayor Esturas:

This is in response to your letter seeking the opinion of this Department
on issues involving the Personal Services (PS) Limitation set forth by the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) vis-a-vis- the Supplemental Budget of
Barangay Calabaca, Capalonga, Camarines Norte.

Based on your information and documents, the Sangguniang Bayan of
Capalonga approved Supplemental Budget No. 02-05 of Barangay Calabaca,
appropriating, among others, the additional honoraria of the barangay officials.
It appears that the additional honoraria was by virtue of the continued
implementation of the Compensation Standardization Law. However, the
Municipal Accountant disallowed the payment of the additional honoraria alleging
that the Supplemental Budget already exceeded the 55% salary ceiling, citing as
her basis the PS limitation under Section 331(b) of the Local Government Code
of 1991 (RA 7160). Thus, you sought the opinion of this Department on the
following issues:

1. Whether or not barangay governments are exempted from the
55% salary limitation in their implementation of the
Compensation Standardization Act (RA 6758).

2. Whether or not the Municipal Accountant can disallow
payment of an item in an (additional honoraria of the
barangay officials) approved Supplemental Budget. If in the
negative, can the said local official be charged for violation of
Section 512 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA
7160)?

Anent the first issue, this Department opines in the affirmative. The basis
of the matter is Local Budget Circular No. 75 dated July 12, 2002 of the
Department of Budget and Management particularly par. 4.0 thereof, to wit:
"The PS limitation/cap shall be waived on the following PS items and
activities mandated by law: xxx 4.4 continued implementation of the
Compensation Standardization Law authorized under RA No. 6758 for
provinces, cities and municipalities as provided for under existing
guidelines for the barangays." Local Budget Circular No. 63 dated October
22, 1996 provides for the guidelines relative to position classification and
compensation in the barangay government.

Anent the second issue, we answer in the negative. Please be informed that
the Municipal Accountant is devoid of any power to disallow payment of the
additional honoraria of barangay officials from out of the approved supplemental
budget because said power is lodged with the Commission on Audit (COA) being
the agency charged with the duty to examine government expenditures or use of
funds. Such power is conducted on post-audit basis except where COA
prescribes temporary or pre-audit in some cases.

As to whether or not the Municipal Accountant can be charged for
violation of Section 512 of the Local Government Code, please be informed that
inasmuch as this penal provision requires an act of withholding of benefits of
barangay officials to be wilful and malicious, the same necessitates factual
adjudication of which this Department does not have authority to do so. At any
rate, charging the Municipal Accountant before the proper forum for violation of
Section 512 of the Local Government Code for disallowing payment of the
honoraria notwithstanding the fact that said payment is authorized by a duly
approved Supplemental Budget is a prerogative of those who have been
prejudiced by the said act.

We hope we have enlightened you on your concerns.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Acting Secretary

Legal:28:ins
cc:OIC-RD Blandino M. Maceda
DILG-Region V