REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagk lihat St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

23 December 2005

VICE MAYOR DANILO B. LACUNA
Manila

Dear Sir:

This refers to your request for this Department's opinion on the extent
and nature of the power of your office in extending recognition to Mr.
Natalio F. Beltran III as an ex-officio Member of the Sangguniang
Panlungsod of Manila.

In particular, you have posited the following queries which we
quote, viz:

1. "Can the Office of the City Vice Mayor implement the
Resolution of the Supreme Court dated August 31,
2005? Does the continuous assumption of Mr. Carlos
Castaneda as the President of the Liga ng Barangay
of Manila, despite knowledge of the decision of the
Regional Trial Court, Branch 33, and the Resolution
of the Honorable Supreme Court, constitute
contemptuous act?

2. Is the power of the Office of the City Vice Mayor to
recognize Natalio F. Beltran as the duly elected
president of the Liga ng mga Barangay, vice Mr.
Carlos Castaneda, purely a ministerial one? Does
such recognition need the concurrence of the
members of the City Council? Attached herewith are
the documents presented by Natalio F. Beltran in
relation to his assumption of office as an ex-officio
member of the City Council?

3. Should the Office of the City Vice Mayor extend
recognition to Natalio F. Beltran as the duly elected
president of the Liga ng mga Barangay, what would
be its effect on the legislative acts of Mr. Carlos
Castaneda whose assumption of office as an ex-
officio member of the City Council was declared void
ab initio?"

Before addressing the abovestated issues, may we briefly re-state
the related factual antecedents, based on our records, for a clearer
appreciation of our reply, to wit:

- On 30 May 2002, the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Manila (SPM for
brevity) enacted City Ordinance No. 8039, entitled: "An Ordinance
Prescribing A Procedure of Election of Officers of the Liga ng
mga Barangay and the Panlungsod na Pederasyon ng
Sangguniang Kabataan in the City of Manila" whereby the dates
of the elections for the District and City Chapters of the Liga and SK
(Manila Chapter) were scheduled thirty (30) days after the elections of
the barangay;

- On 09 July 2002, the Liga ng mga Barangay, represented by its officials,
filed a Petition for Declaratory Relief before the Regional Trial Court of
Manila, Branch 33, docketed as Civil Case No. 02-103996, praying that
City Ordinance No. 8039 (supra) be declared unconstitutional and
invalid.

- On 15 July 2002, the Synchronized Barangay and SK Elections were
held where Messrs. Beltran and Carlos Castañeda separately ran and
won as Punong Barangays;

- Thereafter, the Liga elections pursuant to the Manila City Ordinance
were held that led to the election of Mr. Castañeda as "Liga Manila
Chapter President". As such, Mr. Castañeda took his oath and
assumed the Liga presidency and acted post as Ex-Officio Member of
the SPM;

- In the meantime, Mr. Beltran also ran and won as Liga Manila Chapter
President in the elections called for by the Liga ng Mga Barangay and
per a Certificate of Confirmation dated 23 October 2002, issued by Mr.
James Marty L. Lim (National President of the Liga ng mga Barangay),