Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

17 October 2007

PUNONG BARANGAY CRESENCIANO FEROLINO
Barangay Kinamaligan, Masbate

Dear Sir:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking our clarification on
the proper application of the three-consecutive term limit rule as
embodied under Section 43 (b) of the Local Government Code of 1991(RA
7160).

In your letter, you represented the following facts:

  • In 1994 barangay elections, you ran as Punong Barangay
    and won;

  • In 1997 barangay elections, you ran again for the same
    position and won;

  • In 2002 barangay elections, you ran again and won,
    however your opponent Salvador Danag filed an election
    protest at Municipal Trial Court of Masbate City and was
    proclaimed winner and served as Punong Barangay from
    2002 to 30 January 2005;

  • Accordingly, you filed an appeal at Comelec, Intramuros,
    Manila and last 31 January 2005 you were proclaimed
    winner.

Hence, you now pose this query: Whether or not you are still eligible
to run for re-election as Punong Barangay in the forthcoming 2007
Synchronized Barangay and SK Elections?

Before dealing squarely with your queries, we deem it proper to give
some discussions on the pertinent provisions of law applicable in the case
at hand.

Section 8, Article X of the 1987 Constitution

"SEC. 8. The term of office of elective local officials, except
barangay officials, which shall be determined by law, shall be three
years and no such official shall serve for more than three
consecutive terms. Voluntary renunciation of the office for any
length of time shall not be considered as an interruption in the
continuity of his service for the full term for which he was elected."

Section 43 (b) of the Local Government Code

"SEC. 43. Term of office.- (b) No local elective official
shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive terms in the same
position. Voluntary renunciation of the office for any length of
time shall not be considered as an interruption in the continuity of
service for the full term for which the elective official concerned
was elected. xxx"

The foregoing provisions are the bases for the so-called three-
consecutive term limit rule among local elective officials, which
disqualifies them from running for the same position after serving the
same for three consecutive terms.

In the leading case of Borja vs. COMELEC (G.R. No. 133495, 03
September 1998) and in several cases decided thereafter up to the
present, the Supreme Court consistently ruled that for Section 43 (b) to
apply, two (2) elements must concur, which are: (1) the local official
concerned must have been elected to that office; and (2) said local official
must have fully served the term of same office for three consecutive
terms. If these circumstances are present, then the concerned local
official is already disqualified to run for the same position on his supposed
fourth consecutive term.

At this juncture, it is not amiss to point out that the aforementioned
Section 43 of the Local Government Code did not expressly mandate that
elective barangay officials are covered by the three-term limit rule.
However, the issue as to whether or not elective
barangay officials are covered by the three-consecutive term limit rule to hold the same position
was finally put into rest when on 19 March 2002, RA 9164 was approved,
entitled: "An Act Providing for Synchronized Barangay and Sangguniang
Kabataan Elections, Amending Republic Act No. 7160, as amended, otherwise
known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and For Other Purposes".
Section 2 thereof provides that:

"The term of office of all barangay and sangguniang
kabataan officials after the effectivity of this Act shall be three (3)
years.

No barangay elective official shall serve for more than three
(3) consecutive terms in the same position: Provided, however,
That the term of office shall be reckoned from the 1994 barangay
elections. Voluntary renunciation of office for any length of time
shall not be considered as an interruption in the continuity of
service for the full term for which the elective official was elected."

As clearly provided for in the aforequoted provision, the first term of
office of elective barangay officials, for purposes of computing the three-
consecutive term limit rule, is to be reckoned from the 1994 barangay
elections.