Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

08 April 2008

ATTY. RAMON I. CONSTANCIO
President/CEO
People’s Energy Services, Inc. (PESI)
Sta. Justina, Buhi
Camarines Sur

Dear Atty. Constancio:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on whether the Municipality of Buhi, that Province, has the authority to impose business tax upon People’s Energy Services, Inc. (PESI) when no express authority was given to it in that Municipality’s Revenue Code.

As stated in your letter, PESI owns and operates the Lake Buh-Bari River Hydro Electric Power Plant after its privatization in 2004 through a bidding conducted by Power Assets and Liabilities Management Corporation (PSALM). Since its operation in 2005, PESI had been paying business tax amounting to eighty thousand pesos (Php 80,000) to the Municipality of Buhi. You are aware that the Municipality of Buhi is authorized to impose business tax under Section 143 (h) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160). However, when the Municipality tried to implement this provision via its Municipal Revenue Code, it did not specifically provide for the imposition of business tax to a power generation company, a group to which the PESI belongs. What was provided in the Municipal Revenue Code is a tax on general engineering contractors or installers of heat or power. To your mind, power generation is definitely different from general engineering contractors or installers of heat or power. Such being the case, you are of the view that the Municipality of Buhi cannot impose business tax on PESI. Hence, your query.

At the outset, may we invite your attention to Section 143 (h) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), which provides and we quote:

"SECTION 143. Tax on Business.- The municipality may impose taxes on the following businesses:

xxx xxx xxx

(h) On any business, not otherwise specified in the preceding paragraphs, which the sanggunian concerned may deem proper to tax: Provided, That on any business subject to the excise, value-added or percentage tax under the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the rate of tax shall not exceed two percent (2%) of gross sales or receipts of the preceding calendar year. xxx"

Based on the foregoing, municipalities, like the Municipality of Buhi, may impose tax on business which the Sanggunian Bayan may deem proper subject to the limitation that on any business subject to the excise, value-added or percentage tax under the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the rate of tax shall not exceed 2% of gross sales or receipts of the preceding calendar year. It must be emphasized however that before the Municipality of Buhi may impose and collect such taxes, fees or charges on any business operating thereat, necessarily, the same must first be levied under a duly enacted tax ordinance.

Coming now to your query, since the Municipal Revenue Code of the Municipality of Buhi did not specifically provide for the imposition of business tax to a power generation company like PESI, we are of the view that the imposition and collection of business tax on PESI is legally infirmed as there is yet no ordinance duly enacted for such purpose.

With regard to your claim that PESI is covered under the Mini-Hydroelectric Power Incentives Act (RA 7156) providing a Special Privilege Tax on mini-hydro power plant developers by requiring them to remit only two percent (2%) of the gross receipts derived from the sale of electric power to the Bureau of Internal Revenue, considering that the same is within the technical expertise of the Department of Finance-Bureau of Local Government Finance (DOF-BLGF), we deem it proper that you instead refer the matter to said agency.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

Legal/17
cc: Director Blandino M. Maceda
DILG Regional Office No. 05
Legazpi City