Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmanhal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

BILG GPiviga .G 34. §. 2ODBLS
19 May 2008

VICE MAYOR MARIO 0. SALVADOR
San Jose City, Nueva Ecija

Dear Vice Mayor Salvador:

This refers to your letter requesting this Department’s opinion anent
an issue involving the veto power of the Local Chief Executive on items of
an approncdations ardinance.

In gist, you alleged that your Mayor, Hon. Marivic V. Belena, vetoed
certain items of the City Vice Mayor's office in your 2008 Appropriations
Ordinance, which your Sanggunian, however, failed to override.
Nonetheless, it is your position that the items in the 2007 Annual
Appropriations containing same items vetoed by the Mayor for FY 2008
are deemed re-enacted.

Meantime, you reportedly hired personnel for Janitorial and
General Services but the City Budget Office refused to confirm the said
Job Order and instead referred the matter to the City Legal Officer. You,
however, failed to mention the reason why the City Budget Officer
refused to confirm the Job Order. Hence, we are in a quandary as to the
nature of the referral made by the City Budget Officer to the City Legal
Officer.

Be that as it may, may we inform you that Section 55 (b) of RA 7160
of the Local Government Code of 1991 needs no further interpretation as
the language of the law is very clear and self-explanatory when it
provided that, thus:

“SEC. 585. Veto Power of the Local Chief
Executive.- xxx (b) The local chief executive, except the

9.

punong barangay, shall have the power to veto any
particular item or items of an appropriations
ordinance, an ordinance or resolution adopting a local
development plan and public investment program, or an
ordinance directing the payment of money or creating
liability. In such a case, the veto shall not affect the
item or items which are not objected to. The vetoed
item or items shall not take effect unless the
sanggunian overrides the veto in the manner herein
provided; otherwise, the item or items in the
appropriations ordinance of the previous year
corresponding to those vetoed, if any, shall be deemed
reenacted.” (underlining ours)

However, while this Department can give an opinion thereon if only
to satisfy your request, administrative protocol and professional courtesy
dictate that we first await the legal opinion of your City Legal Officer,
based on the latter's mandate under Section 481 (b) (3) (ili) of RA 7160
which reads: “Render his opinion in writing on any question of law
when requested to do so by the governor, mayor, or sanggunian”.

Hence, please be advised that we shall defer rendering our opinion

on your request until after your City Legal Officer shall have issued his
opinion,

| Thank you,
Very truly yours,
AUSTERE A. PANADER
Acting Secretary ye
Legal:87/La
ce: Director Josefina Castilla-Go

DILG Regional Office No. Ill
San Fernando City, Pampanga

