Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium IT Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

February 5, 2008

ATTY. RAMON T. CABAUATAN, JR.
Municipal Vice-Mayor
Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya

Dear Vice-Mayor Cabauatan:

This pertains to your letter requesting our legal opinion on the following queries we hereunder quoted in toto, to wit:

1. Does RA 9184 give blanket authority to the Mayor to approve all kinds of expenditures that the Municipality incurs, including those ordinary expenses of the Sanggunian Bayan?

2. Is the Vice-Mayor and the members of the Sanggunian Bayan covered by par (XV) of Section 444 of the Local Government Code of 1991, referring to approved by the Mayor of travel authority, considering the fact that the Vice-Mayor is empowered to sign all warrants drawn on the Municipal treasury for all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the Sanggunian Bayan?

Your first query was impelled by the contention of your Mayor that all expenditures, even that of the Sanggunian Bayan, should pass through his Office for approval invoking RA 9184 otherwise known as "Government Procurement Act" as basis. He pointed out that said law impliedly amended or repealed RA 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 (LGC).

On the other hand, your second query was prompted by your Mayor's issuance of a Memorandum to the Municipal Treasurer, Accountant and Budget Officer directing them not to entertain official travel/trips outside the territorial jurisdiction of elected officials and staff of the Sanggunian Bayan without the corresponding travel order issued by him, invoking Section 444 (XV) of the LGC.

At the outset, allow us first to cite the salient features of the applicable laws, viz:

Section 445 (a) (1) of the Local government Code of 1991, the Vice-Mayor shall:

"(1) Be the presiding officer of the sanggunian bayan and sign all warrants drawn on the municipal treasury for all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the sanggunian bayan."

Section 344 of RA 7160: Certification on, and approval of vouchers -

"xxx vouchers and payrolls shall be certified to and approved by the head of the department or office who has administrative control of the fund concerned, as to validity, propriety and legality of the claim involved."(underlining ours)

Section 39 of the Manual on the New Government Accounting System for Local Government Units, prepared by the Commission on Audit, states that:

"Approval of Disbursements. Approval of disbursements by the Local Chief Executive (LCE) himself shall be required whenever local funds are disbursed, except for regularly recurring administrative expenses such as: payrolls for regular or permanent employees, expenses for light, water, telephone and telegraph services, remittance to government creditor agencies such as GSIS, BIR, PHILHEALTH, LBP, DBP, NPO, PS of the DBM and others, where the authority to approve may be delegated. Disbursement vouchers for expenditures appropriated for the operation of the Sanggunian shall be approved by the provincial Vice Governor, the city Vice Mayor or the municipal Vice-Mayor, as the case maybe."(Emphasis ours)

Section 75 Rule XXV of RA 9184, otherwise known as the "Government Procurement Reform Act"

"xxx. This law amends Title Six, Book Two of RA No. 7160 otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 xxx."

Accordingly, since the Vice-Mayor as Presiding Officer is the head of both the offices of the Vice-Mayor and the Sanggunian Bayan, he/she has the authority to approve disbursement vouchers for expenditures appropriated for its operation.

In one case1 the Supreme Court En Banc, in supporting their declaration that the Vice-Governor has the authority to approve