Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

A. Francisco Gold Condominium Il Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ee pwr ten, cee AF wm O-
Te DPONIGA, ay} ER

27 May 2009

ron

VICE-MAYOR JANET D. ZARAGOZA

Tayug, Pangasinan
Dear Vice-Mayor Zaragoza:

This has reference to your earlier eight (8) letters seeking our legal opinion
on various queries, which we consolidated and summarized as follows:

1) Under Article 84 (a)(3) of the Rules and Regulations
Implementing the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160),
leaves of absence of the members of the sanggunian shall be
approved by the municipal vice-mayor.

(a) Whether or not the aforesaid provision has already beer
modified or amended;

(b) What are the requirements that a Sangguniang Bayan
Member must comply in the event that he decides to take
leave of absence to travel abroad for personal reason;

(c) Is there a difference in the appreciation of temporary
vacancy due to local travel of an elective official for
personal reason and that for official business;

(d) Is there a legal basis in the interpretation made by one
of your municipal officials that if an elective official
leaves his territorial jurisdiction for three (3) days for
personal reasons, the filing of an application for leave of
absence is required. On the other hand, if said elective ra
official leaves his territorial jurisdiction also for three (3)

}
a

-2.

days but this time for official business, the filing of an
application for leave is no longer required.

2) The Sangguniang Bayan (SB) of Tayug purchased one
(1) unit of second hand van and one (1) unit of brand new
motorcycle. Said SB enacted an ordinance creating the
position of Administrative Aide [II/Driver I to officially drive
the aforesaid vehicles. Unfortunately, the Mayor vetoed such
ordinance. As represented, the SB cannot muster the required
two-thirds (2/3) vote in order to override the Mayor’s veto.

(a) Who should drive the aforesaid vehicles when the
same will be used officially;

(b) Can the SB lend the aforesaid vehicles to their
constituents for the purpose of, for example, transporting their
ailing relatives to the hospital, etc.;

(c) Can the SB lend the vehicle to other government
employees for the purpose of, for example, delivering
communications or for their service;

(d) Is the SB allowed to “borrow” the official driver of
the Municipal ambulance considering that it has a separate
plantilla of positions from the Office of the Mayor;

(3) The SB enacted an ordinance abolishing the position
of Midwife III. However, the Mayor vetoed the same on a lone
ground that he has already appointed a person to that
position. An inquiry was made to the Civil Service
Commission (CSC) on the validity of such appointment made
by the mayor. The CSC opined that there was a procedural
lapse on the preparation of the appointment made by the
Mayor, as the SB has not yet enacted a resolution determining
the members of the Personnel Selection Board (PSB) pursuant
to Section 80 of the Local Government Code of 1991.

(a) Can the Mayor exercise his veto power on any
ordinance passed by the SB without any valid ground?;

(b) What is the effect of the CSC’s letter-reply on the veto
made by the Municipal Mayor on the aforesaid

-3-

ordinance? If in the negative, what remedy can the
Vice-Mayor avail?

(4) In the Municipality of Tayug’s Annual Budget for
Fiscal Year 2008, can the item of Calamity Fund therein be
legally changed to Anti-Insurgency/Contingency Fund? Hf in
the positive, will the declaration of the Sangguniang Bayan
still a prerequisite in order to make use of the funds under
anti-insurgency/contingency expenses;

(5) In relation to Section 344 and Section 345 of the
Local Government of 1991 (RA 7160) pertaining to
certification and approval of vouchers and to officials
authorized to draw checks in settlement of obligations,
respectively, who are given the authority to assume the duties
in case of absence of the approving officials or those officials
authorized to draw checks in settlement of obligations? What
are the duties that can be performed by their immediate
assistants and are there any limitations thereof?

(6) The Sangguniang Bayan of Tayug conducted a special
session wherein nine (9) members including the Vice-Mayor,
Budget Officer and MPDC officer were present. In said session,
the Annual Appropriations Ordinance was approved on its
second reading. Some SB members moved to suspend the
rules to expedite the approval of the ordinance on its second
and third reading. Said motion lost. At around 10 o’clock on
the following day, some members of the SB, constituting a
quorum and believing that what had transpired the other day
was a mere caucus since no written notice was given,
conducted another special session where they approved, on its
second and third reading, the Annual Appropriations
Ordinance.

(a) Will the appearance and participation of the SB
members in the first special session despite the alleged lack of
notice, constitute a waiver thereof?

(b) When the local chief executive certifies as urgent the
Annual Appropriations Ordinance, can the SB suspend the rules

and give way for the second and third readings in one single
session?

t
I

-4-

(c) If in both special sessions the requirement of
written notice was complied with, which of the two special
sessions must be acknowledged?

(d) Whether the SB members, on the regular session,
may validly insert some items that they forgot when they
approved the Annual Appropriations Ordinance?

(7) What happens if after ninety (90) days or more the
Sangguniang Bayan still has not passed the Ordinance
authorizing the Annual Appropriations? There being no
approved budget yet, an increase in the salary of all
government employees was approved effective July 2007, as
such, what will be the salary given from January to June
2008?

In reply to your first set of queries, may we invite your attention to Section

“SECTION 47. Approval of Leaves of Absence.—(a)
Leaves of absence of local elective officials shall be approved
as follows:

XXX EEX xEK

(2) Leaves of absence of a vice-governor or a city or
municipal vice-mayor shall be approved by the local chief
executive concerned: Provided, That the leaves of absence of
the members of the sangeunian and its employees shall be
approved by the vice-governor or city or municipal vice-mayor
concerned,”

piece:

‘7

XxX xXXX

ARTICLE 84. Leaves of Absence. (a) Leaves of absence

of elective Jocal officials shall be approved as follows:
XXX p., #4 KEK ,

(3) Leaves of absence of the members. of the
sanggunian and appointive employees therein shall be
approved by the vice-governor or city or municipal vice-mayor
concerned;” KXX XEK XKK

(Emphasis Supplied)

A7(a)(2) of the Code and Article 84 (a)(3) of its Implementing Rules jand
Regulations, which we quoted as follows:

~5-

Please be informed that the aforequoted provisions are still the governing

rule pertaining to the filing of leave of absences of the members of the
sanggunian, except the Barangays.

May we inform you further that if the filing of leave of absences is due to
travel abroad for personal reason, this Department has previously issued
Memorandum Circular No. 2001-52 re Rules and Regulations Governing the
Foreign Travel of Local Government Officials and Employees (08 May 2001);
Memorandum Circular No. 2006-22 re Amending Memorandum Circular No.
2001-52 dated may 8, 2001, entitled, Rules and Regulations Governing the Foreign
Travel of Local Government Officials and Employees (06 May 2006); and
Memorandum Circular No. 2006-163 re Foreign Travel of Local Government
Officials and Employees (30 November 2006). Based on these issuances, if a
sanggunian member intends to pursue a personal or private trip that does not
extend to more than three (3) months, or when such trip is to be undertaken
during a period where there is no emergency or crisis, said sanggunian member
shall notify the concerned Local Chief Executive in writing, with the duly
accomplished leave application filed for the approval, or other appropriate action
of the Local Chief Executive. In the event that the leave application is approved,
the said approved leave application shall serve as the Travel Authorization

relative to such personal or private trip. Before leaving, said sanggunian member
shall also notify his sanggunian.

On the other hand, if the period of personal or private trip of fhe
sanggunian member extends to more than three (3) months, or during a period of
emergency or crisis, a travel authority from the Honorable Secretary of fhe
Interior and Local Government is required.

At this juncture, may we respectfully correct the interpretation made by one
of your municipal officials pertaining to the filing of leave of absence for personal
reason and that for official business. According to that official, if an elective
official leaves his territorial jurisdiction for three (3) days for personal reasons,
the filing of an application for leave of absence is required but if it is for ofriptal
business, the filing of an application for leave is no longer required.

We find his interpretation partly correct. Under the rules, if an elective
official leaves his territorial jurisdiction for personal reasons, even for a day,| he
must file the necessary application for leave since elective officials are also
entitled to the same leave privileges as those enjoyed by appointive local
officials, including the cumulation and commutation thereof (Section 81, RA
7160). On the contrary, if he leaves for official business, naturally, he will: no
longer file an application for leave. He will only attach the invitation or proof that
his travel is for official business.

ff

-6-

Hence, after the traveling sanggunian member has complied with the
foregoing procedural requirements on the filing of leave application and that the
same has been duly approved, his position shall be considered temporarily
vacant. There being a temporary vacancy, the rule of succession will now apply.
May it be emphasized that there will be no difference in the appreciation of
temporary vacancy due to local travel of an elective official for personal reason
and that for official business. Under the law, one of the grounds for temporary
vacancy is travel abroad. It did not qualify whether such travel abroad shall be
for personal reason or for official business. Well-settled is the rule in statutory
construction that when the law does not distinguish, we should not also
distinguish (expressio unius est exclusio alterius).

Let it be noted however that the power of the governor to appoint under
Section 45 of the Code, in case where vacancy exists in the sangguniang bayan,
pertains only to permanent vacancy. Though the appointing power of the
governor may extend only to permanent vacancies, the same may appear likewise
to be exercised by him in case of temporary vacancies. As ruled in the case of
Menzon vs. Petilla (197 SCRA 251), the provision on permanent vacancies may
analogously be applied to temporary vacancies. Thus, applying the foregoing
rule, appointments to permanent vacancies in the sangguniang bayan, Section 45
[b] of the Local Government Code requires that “only the nomince of the
political party under which the sanggunian member concerned had been
elected and whose elevation to the position next higher in rank created
the last vacancy in the sanggunian shall be appointed". The appointee shall,
therefore, come from the same political party as that of the sanggunian member

who caused the vacancy and who was elevated to the position next higher in
rank.

Anent your second set of queries, may we invite your attention to Section
376 of Local Government Code (RA 7160), to wit:

“SECTION 376. Responsibility for Proper Use and Care
of Government Property.-The person in actual physical
possession of government property or entrusted with its
custody and control shall be responsible for its proper use and
care and shall exercise due diligence in the utilization and
safekeeping thereof.”

According to you, the Sangguniang Bayan of Tayug purchased one (1) unit
of second hand van and one (1) unit of brand new motorcycle. Thus, the
Sangguniang Bayan is the owner of the aforesaid properties. In this
Department’s opinions, we are consistent in saying that the Vice- Mayor is the
head of the Sangguniang Bayan. As such, he exercises contro! and supervision

mi

-7-

over all properties owned, assigned or issued to the Sangguniang Bayan such as
the aforesaid properties.

In this connection, under the rules, all government motor vehicles shall be
used exclusively and strictly for official business [Section 361(d) of the
Government Accounting and Auditing Manual (GAAM), Vol. 1]. Having been |
entrusted with the custody and control of the aforesaid properties, the vice-mayor
shall therefore be responsible for their proper use and care and shall exercise
due diligence in the utilization and safekeeping thereof. Part of such

responsibility is to see to it that the purchased vehicles are used strictly for
official business.

There being no official driver for your newly purchased vehicles since,
according to you, the ordinan¢e creating the position of Administrative Aide
\ll/Driver | to officially drive the aforesaid vehicles has been vetoed by your
Municipal Mayor, we are of the view that you, using your discretion being the
official responsible for their proper and/or official use, may lend the same to your
constituents for the purpose of transporting their ailing relatives to the hospital,
to other government employees for the purpose of delivering communications or
to the official driver of the Municipal ambulance even if it has a separate plantilla
of positions from the Office of the Mayor. Thus, the parameter thereof shall not
be on who will use drive and/or use the government vehicte but rather the manner
in which the government vehicle is used. May we respectfully remind you that
the aforesaid government vehi¢les were purchased primarily for the use of the
Sangguniang Bayan and by using them, the ultimate purpose is that you will be
able to discharge properly your duties and functions thereby eventually
benefiting your constituents. What is incumbent upon you is to determine that
the aforesaid properties are indeed used properly and/or for official business.

|

Along this line, may we’ point out that the phrase “for official business”
when referring to the use of the government motor vehicles, is synonymous to
“public use or purpose”. So that when a government vehicle is used for public
purpose, the same is used |for official business. Public purpose is not
unconstitutional merely because it incidentally benefits a limited number of
persons (Binay vs. Domingo G.R. No. 92389, September 11, 1991; COA Decision No.
94-222 August 11, 1994).

We now come to your third set of queries. Please be informed that the veto
power of the local chief executive is, by the explicit language of Section 54 of the
Local Government Code of 1991, available against all ordinances enacted by the
sanggunian. With regard to resolutions, veto power can be exercised only,
pursuant to Section 55 (b) and (c), of the Local Government Code, against
resolutions involving local development plans and public investment programs.

‘
|

enti

ae

_ Local chief executives are explicitly allowed to exercise their veto power only on

the ground that a legislative enactment is either ulira vires or prejudicial to the
in te welfare (Section 55, Local Government Code).

“The opinion rendered by the CSC is considered an executive interpretation.
Upon its issuance, it will not immediately affect (e.g. nullify) the previously
exercised veto power by your local chief executive. The local chief executive is
presumed to have regularly exercised his veto power as well as his appointment
power, unless evidence to the contrary is determined in a proper court action. -
What you can do is to file the proper action before the court and there you can
use the CSC opinion as a matter of evidence. The CSC opinion may carry
persuasive effect upon the court if the opinion is correct. Furthermore, the legal
opinion, in proper cases, can also be a source of good faith on the part of the

public official who acted based thereon.

*
\ H

Anent your fourth set of queries, please be informed that Section 324 (d) of
the Local Government Code of 1991 as amended by Republic Act 8185 mandates
all local government units to set aside “Five percent (5%) of the estimated
revenue from regular sources xxx as annual lump sum appropriations for
relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and other works or services in
connection with calamities which may occur during the budget year.
Provided, however that such fund shall be used only in the area, or a
portion thereof, of the local government unit or other areas affected by a

disaster or calamity, as determined and declared by the local sanggunian
concerned.”

We are of the opinion that you cannot validly change the item of Calamity
Fund in your Annual Appropriations to Anti-Insurgency/Contingency Fund.
Please be informed that the term “calamity” has been defined under Section 3 of
the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA 8185 as “a state of
extreme distress or misfortune produced by some adverse circumstances
or events or any great misfortune or cause, or loss or misery caused by
natural forces such as earthquakes, typhoons, floods, hurricanes,
epidemics or other disasters causing widespread loss of, and/or extensive
damage to human lives, livestock, crops and property”. In the joint DBM
and DILG Memorandum Circular No. 2003-1 dated 20 March 2003, the use of the
appropriation for calamity fund was expanded so as to include the relief,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and other works or services in connection with
man-made disasters resulting from unlawful acts of insurgents, terrorists and
other criminals as well as for disaster preparedness and other pre-disaster
activities. To our mind, your impending change of terminologies, that is, from
calamity to anti-insurgency/contingency fund will restrict the otherwise expanded
use of local calamity fund appropriation. The impending change has absolutely

+

-9-

no other reason but to restrict the usage of the fund. If the term is successfully
changed to insurgency/contingency fund, the appropriation made therein will be
used exclusively for insurgency/contingency related activities.

With regard to your fifth set of queries, may we invite your attention to the
last portions of Sections 344 and 345 of the Code, to wit:

“SECTION 344. Certification, and Approval of,
Vouchers.— xxx XxX KXX

In case of temporary absence _or incapacity of the
department head or chief of office, the officer next-in-rank
shall automatically perform his function and shall be fully
responsible therefor.” (Emphasis Supplied)

“SECTION 345. Officials Authorized to Draw Checks in
Settlement of Obligations.—-xxx XXX XxK

In case of temporary absence or incapacity of the
foregoing officials, these duties shall devolve upon their
immediate assistants.” (Emphasis Supplied)

The aforequoted provisions already indicated those officials who will
perform the functions or upon whom duties will be devolved, in case of
temporary absence of the officials concerned. May we point out however thatthe
remedy given in the aforequoted provisions is applicable only if the absence of
the concerned officials is temporary, not permanent (e.g. non-appointment of|the
official concerned), To address the vacuum created, in this Department’s Opinion
No. 22, series of 2006, we opined therein that “ xxx the permanent absenc¢ of
the local administrator, not having appointed yet, should not be a
hindrance for the local government unit to transact its usual business) as
it is a well-entrenched rule that the law does not require the impossible.”
We further opined therein that the City Mayor could instead directly perform|the
functions of the local administrator based on her statutory function to “exer¢ise
general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services and
activities of the city government”(Sect. 445 [bj[1], RA 7160). Please be
informed that the Municipal Mayor has the same statutory function embodied
under Section 444[b][1] of the Code.

With regard to your sixth set of queries, under Section 52 of the Code jand
Article 105 of its Implementing Rules and Regulations, for a special session tp be
valid, the same musi meet the requirements set forth, namely:(a) there must be a call

¥

-~10-

for a special session either by the Local Chief Executive or by the majority of the
Members of the Sanggunian when public interest so demands; (b) a written notice
shall be personally served to the individual sanggunian member at his usual
place of residence; (3) the notice shall be served at least twenty-four (24) hours
before the special session; (4) the written notice must state the date, time and
purpose of the special session; and (5) no other matter may be considered at a
special session except those stated in the notice unless otherwise agreed upon
by 2/3 vote of the members present, there being a quorum.

On the basis alone of your representation that there was a lack of written
notice in the first special session conducted, we are of the view that the conduct
of such special session, including the passage of your Appropriations Ordinance
during such session, suffered from serious legal infirmity. Such defect cannot be
waived by the appearance and participation of the SB members in the first special
session. May it be noted, however, that this Department, not being a judicial
court, cannot declare said special session, together with your Appropriations
Ordinance passed during such session, invalid for failure to comply with the
provisions of law. Our opinion as to the legal infirmity of the special session as
well as your Appropriations Ordinance passed therein, can be used as ground jn
going to court for the filing of the appropriate civil case to declare the first special
session, and the Appropriation Ordinance passed thereon to be invalid. In the
meantime, the first special session and ordinance enjoy the presumption pf
regularity and are thus considered valid, unless declared otherwise by the cou

As to the issue of certification by the local chief executive as urgent the
Annual Appropriations Ordinance, please be informed that the Local Government
Code recognizes the competence of the local chief executive to certify as urgent
any ordinance or resolution to be passed by the sanggunian. However, the Cofle
and its IRR failed to categorically specify as to what ordinances andjor
resolutions should be certified to as urgent. Neither does there seem to be any
fixed measure or, at the very least, any instance or controlling condition that
would give rise to the certification as urgent of any passage of an ordinance jor
resolution. We are of the opinion, however, that the authority of the local chief
executive to certify as urgent any legislative matter is granted by law in order|to
allow LGUs, at the instance of the local chief executive, to respond quickly,
through legislative measures, any exigency of public service, public emergengy,
or calamity which requires immediate attention and solution. Normally, the
passage of the ordinance authorizing the Annual Appropriations is certified jas
urgent for it relates to an exigency that requires immediate attention.

Such certification of urgency of the Annual Appropriations Ordinance

implies that it need not go through the third and final reading, unless otherwise
specified in the internal rules of procedures of the concerned Sanggunian. Let jt

K

-li-

be noted that in the Malonzo vs, Zamora case (G.R. No. 137718, 27 July 1999), the
Court pronounced that there is nothing in the law which prohibits that the three
readings of a proposed ordinance be held in just one session day. Hence, the
court ruled that, unlike Congress, the three readings in the sanggunian of a
proposed measure could be done in one session since the law does not require
that it be done on separate days.

We now come to the issue on whether the SB members, on the regular
session, may validly insert some items that they forgot when they approved, ina .
special session, the Annual Appropriations Ordinance. If such items to be
inserted are substantive, the insertion thereof cannot be validly made. Please be
informed that under Section 321 of the Code, “all budgetary proposals shall be
included and considered in the budget preparation process”. However, if
the items that they forgot are brought about by mere typographical
erroriomission committed, we are of the opinion that the insertion thereon in the
Annual Appropriations Ordinance is permissible.

Finally, anent your seventh set of queries, may we invite you attention to
Section 323 of the Code, which we quoted hereunder in part:

“SECTION 323. Failure to Enact the Annual
Appropriations.—xxx If the sanggunian still fails to enact such
ordinance (the ordinance authorizing the Annual Appropriations)
after ninety (90) days from the beginning of the fiscal year, the
ordinance authorizing the appropriations of the preceding year
shall be deemed reenacted and shall remain in force and effect
until the ordinance authorizing the proposed appropriations is
passed by the sanggunian concerned. However, only the
annual appropriations for salaries and wages of existing
positions, statutory and contractual obligations, and essential
operating expenses authorized in the annual and supplemental
budgets for the preceding year shall be deemed reenacted and
disbursement of funds shall be in accordance therewith. 20”
(Emphasis Supplied)

The aforequoted provision is clear. If the ordinance authorizing the annual
_ appropriations is not enacted even after the lapsed of the 90-day period, the
budget of the preceding year shall remain in force and effect until the ordinance
authorizing the proposed appropriations is passed by the sanggunian concerned.
Since the last part of the aforequoted provision states that “the annual
appropriations for salaries and wages of existing positions shall be deemed reenacted
and disbursement of funds shall be in accordance therewith”, it necessarily implies
that the salaries and wages of existing positions shall be in accordance with that

re

rt _ CE re nb

-12-

given in the preceding year. This is logical since the annual appropriation is said
to be the same as that in the preceding year.

Thus, taking into consideration the foregoing rules, notwithstanding the
increase of the salary in the middle of the preceding year, the salaries and wages
of existing positions in your municipality shall be similar to that given in the
preceding year. It must stressed however that once the ordinance authorizing the
proposed budget is approved by the sanggunian concerned, the same shall be
given a retroactive effect thereby giving the additional salary effective January
2008.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.
Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADER
Undersecretary J

Cc: Regional Director Manuel V. Biason, CESO til \
DILG-Region |
San Fernando City (La Union)

Legal/17
oy

