REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

ATTY. JOSEPH J.R. CASTILLO
City Legal Officer
Pasay City

Dear

This pertains to your letter requesting for our legal opinion on the
status of appointed City Councilors of Pasay City in the event they file their
certificates of candidacy.

You represented that "on September 2006, the (10) City Councilors of the
Sangguniang Panlungsod of Pasay City were suspended (whom later on,
sometime January 2006, were dismissed) by the Office of the Ombudsman. On
November 2006, ten (10) persons were appointed to the vacant public elective
offices of the suspended City Councilors by Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-
Arroyo as acting City Councilors. Most of the appointed City Councilors in the
public elective offices concerned are presently contemplating on filing their
certificate of candidacy".

Based on the above set of facts, you now posed the following
queries, to wit:

1. "Whether or not the appointed City Councilors to the public
elective offices will benefit from the provisions of the Fair
Elections Act and COMELEC Resolution No. 7767 (30
November 2006) which states that "Any elective official,
whether national or local, who has filed a certificate of
candidacy for the same or other office shall not be considered
resigned from his office"; OR

2. Whether or not the appointed City Councilors to the public
elective offices may be deemed ipso facto resigned by virtue of
the Omnibus Election Code provision (Section 66) that "Any
person holding a public appointive office or position ... shall be
considered ipso facto resigned from his office upon the filing of
his certificate of candidacy."

In reply thereto, may we restate the following specific provisions of
law and COMELEC Resolution as our reference and guide, to wit:

"SEC. 66. Candidates holding appointive office or position.-
Any person holding a public appointive office or position,
inclusive active members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines
and officers and employees in government-owned or controlled
corporations, shall be considered ipso facto resigned from his office
upon the filing of his certificate of candidacy." (Omnibus
Election Code)

"SEC. 4. Effects of Filing Certificates of Candidacy.- a) Any
person holding a public appointive office or position including
active members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and other
officers and employees in government-owned or controlled
corporations, shall be considered ipso facto resigned from his office
upon the filing of his certificate of candidacy; b) Any elective
official, whether national or local, running for any office shall not
be considered resigned upon the filing of his certificate of
candidacy." (COMELEC Resolution No. 7799 dated 05 January
2007)

It bears to emphasize that the mode or manner of entering into
government service, whether by appointment or by election, is separate
and distinct from the nature of the office being held by a public official,
whether it is appointive or elective office/position.

A careful reading of Section 66 of the Omnibus Election Code will