Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

14 May 2008

VICE GOVERNOR EDWARD THOMAS F. JOSON
Provincial Capitol Building
Cabanatuan City

Dear Vice Governor Joson:

This refers to your letter requesting for a legal opinion regarding DILG Opinion No. 11, series of 2008, dated 17 March 2008 vis-Ã -vis the additional facts and Supreme Court decisions you presented in the instant letter.

It may be recalled that in said DILG Opinion No. 11, this Department opined that the series of memoranda you issued as Acting Governor could well fall within the meaning and contemplation of the word "appoint" found under Section 46 (a) of the Local Government Code since it directed certain officials other than those officials earlier designated by Governor Umali to perform the functions of certain offices. Such being the case and per the limitations on the power of the Acting Governor under Section 46 (a) of the Local Government Code, the subject series of memoranda should have only been issued by the Acting Governor at the time when the temporary incapacity of the Governor shall have already exceed thirty (30) working days.

In your instant letter, you informed the Department of the following additional facts leading to your issuance of the series of memoranda subject matter of the abovesaid DILG Opinion No. 11, to wit:

1. "On July 18, 2008 and subsequent dates thereafter, Governor Aurelio Umali issued several special orders designating different department heads and regular employees to assume positions outside and irrelevant to their existing appointments."

2. In relation thereto, special orders were likewise issued designating employees from different departments with lower rank to assume the above-stated positions as Officers in charge. It is also worthy to mention that the persons who were assigned as officers in charge lack the required competency, qualifications and experience relative to the positions they were ordered to hold.

3. The personnel involved in memorandum 02-21, s. 2008 are heads of offices and regular employees who were designated by Governor Aurelio Umali to assume functions irrelevant and totally inconsistent with their original appointments.

4. The above-mentioned department heads (who are holding career positions) and other regular employees affected were all "assigned" in the Provincial Information Office and other offices citing the reason "for exigency of the service" without securing their respective consents.

5. These department and office heads were all forced to report at the Provincial Information Officer (PIO) doing nothing during the entire office hours and they were made under the supervision of Mr. Edgardo Rillon whose appointment was disapproved by the Civil Service Commission due to lack of civil service eligibility.

6. These personnel, who were victims of this unlawful assignments, had made clear their grievance and objections to these unlawful transfer constituting their demotions from their respective offices and are in the process of preparing and filing the necessary complaints with the appropriate government agencies.

7. The undersigned is well aware of the ruling made by the Supreme Court in the case of Divinagracia, Jr. vs. Sto. Tomas, 244 SCRA 595, that a transfer that results in promotion or demotion, advancement or reduction or transfer that aims to hire the employee away from his permanent position, cannot be done without the employees consent, the unconsented