Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor.  Magapagal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


February 14, 2007

MAYOR SERGIO G. AMORA, JR.
Candijay, Bohol

Dear Mayor Amora:

This is in response to your letter-query seeking the opinion of this
Department on issues relative to the authority of the local chief executive to
negotiate, enter into and sign a loan contract with a banking institution in
order to finance a local project.

Based on the information and documents furnished us, the
Sangguniang Bayan of Candijay, Bohol, approved on January 13, 2006
Resolution No. 2006-1-2, authorizing and giving full power to you as the
Municipal Mayor to negotiate, enter into and sign a loan contract with the
Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) in the amount of P6 million for the
purchase of specified heavy equipments, subject to the ratification by the
Sangguniang Bayan. The amount of loan will be secured by IRA/income of
the local government unit. Pursuant to the said Resolution, you applied for
a loan with the LBP after the winning bidder to supply the heavy equipments
was duly determined in a bidding conducted for the purpose. The loan was
approved by the LBP but the release of the proceeds thereof was withheld
because the bank required a ratification by the Sangguniang Bayan in view
of the provisions in the aforesaid Resolution which reads "subject to
ratification by the SB". You now seek our opinion on whether or not the
said ratification is, indeed, required under the law.

Before answering your query, it is worth revisiting the following
provisions of RA 7160 or the Local Government Code of 1991, to wit:

"Section 297. (a) A local government unit may contract loans,
credits and other forms of indebtedness with any government or domestic
private bank and other lending institutions to finance the construction,
installation, improvement, expansion, operation, or maintenance of public
facilities, infrastructure facilities, housing projects, the acquisition of real
property, and the implementation of other capital investment projects,
subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the local
government unit and the lender. The proceeds from such transactions shall
accrue directly to the local government unit concerned."

"Section 22. (e) Unless otherwise provided in this Code, no contract
may be entered into by the local chief executive in behalf of the local
government unit without prior authorization by the sangguniang concerned."

"Section 444. (b) For efficient, effective and economical governance
for the purpose of which is the general welfare of the municipality and its
inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code, the municipal mayor shall:

(vi) Upon authorization by the sangguniang bayan,
represent the municipality in all its business transactions
and sign on its behalf all bonds, contracts, and obligations,
and such other documents made pursuant to law or
ordinance."

"Section 447. (a) (2) (iii) Subject to the provisions of Book II of this
Code and upon the majority vote of all of the members of the sangguniang
bayan, authorize the municipal mayor to negotiate and contract loans and
other forms of indebtedness."

Based on the foregoing, it is clear and unequivocal that a Local
Government Unit (LGU), through the Local Chief Executive (LCE) concerned, may
authorize loans to finance, among others, infrastructure facilities, upon prior
authorization by the sangguniang concerned.

In our earlier DILG Opinion No. 48, s. 1996, the Department opined
(Sangguniang Bayan by nature of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan" refers to prior authorization given by the
Sangguniang before the Local Chief Executive (LCE) could enter into a
contract in behalf of the LGU. That authority should not be confused with
"pre-approval" of contracts. It is worth emphasizing that the Local
Government Code did not vest unto the Sanggunian the power or authority
to pre-approve contracts after it has already given its prior authorization to
said contract. The authority of the Sanggunian is simply limited to the grant of prior authorization of the LCE before entering
into any contract. The reason for this could have been obvious, i.e.
separation of powers.

It is settled that the LCE performs executive functions while the
Sangguniang Bayan, of which the Vice Mayor is also a component member,
performs legislative functions. Laws and jurisprudence would tell us that
there should be separation of powers and functions between the executive
and legislative bodies, and that encroachment in either is not countenanced.
Pre-approval of a contract or ratification of a contract by the Sangguniang
after it has already given its prior authorization to the LCE to enter into a
contract leads the latter has, in fact, already entered into the contract, can be
readily construed and viewed as an encroachment of the authority of the LCE.
We are of the view that once the authorization has
been given by the Sangguniang, it becomes now the responsibility and power
to enter into the contract. All inadequacies and
irregularities that may attend in the execution of the contract is the sole
responsibility of the LCE.