REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

03 April 2008

DIRECTOR EVELYN A. TROMPETA
DILG Regional Office No. 06
Iloilo City

Dear Director Trompeta:

This pertains to your Indorsement to this office of the letter of Punong Barangay Cosette Marie M. Belarmino of Barangay Poblacion, Altavas, Aklan, dated 13 December 2007 and the letter of the Members of the Sangguniang Barangay of the same barangay dated 05 December 2007, with regard to the controversy obtaining in the appointments made by the newly elected Punong Barangay in favor of the Barangay Treasurer and Barangay Secretary.

In your referral, you particularly sought clarification on DILG Memorandum Circular No. 2002-150 dated 02 September 2002, entitled: "Guidelines on the Appointment of Barangay Secretaries, Treasurers and Other Appointive Barangay Officials", specifically with respect to Section 1, paragraph 2 thereof.

To start with, Section 1, paragraph 2 of said Circular provides that "the Barangay Secretary shall be of legal age, a qualified voter and an actual resident of the barangay concerned".

Your query arose from the following situation, to wit: Punong Barangay Belarmino appointed Mr. Arturo J. Gregorio as Barangay Secretary and Mrs. Adelia Bolivar as Barangay Treasurer. Said appointments were then forwarded to the Sangguniang Barangay for concurrence in accordance with Sections 394 and 395 of the Local Government Code, respectively, which provides that the Barangay Secretary and Barangay Treasurer shall be appointed by the Punong Barangay with the concurrence of the majority of all the Sangguniang Barangay Members. On
05 December 2007, however, the Sangguniang Barangay wrote the DILG Regional Director, informing the latter that they vehemently opposed the appointments issued by the newly elected Punong Barangay, citing as basis DILG Memorandum Circular No. 2002-150 dated 02 September 2002 (as aforestated), which requires that the Barangay Treasurer and Barangay Secretary should be actual residents and are qualified voters of the barangay concerned. In the said letter, the Sangguniang Barangay Members also signified their attestation that the former Barangay Treasurer, Lei D. Quimpo, and Barangay Secretary, Elnora C. Losa, be reappointed to the same positions considering that they have served efficiently.

Without dwelling yet on the issue as to whether or not the appointees of Punong Barangay Belarmino are actual residents of the barangay, allow us in the meantime to discuss the legal requirements in the appointment of Barangay Secretary and Barangay Treasurer under the Local Government Code.

To start with, may we point out that the Punong Barangay performs dual functions, namely: he acts as the local chief executive of the barangay government per Section 389 of the Local Government Code, and as Presiding Officer of the Sangguniang Barangay per Section 390 of the same Code. It is just proper, therefore, to delineate the matters to be acted upon by the Punong Barangay as local chief executive of the barangay, and the matters to be acted upon by him as Presiding Officer of the Sangguniang Barangay.

Along this line, in the case of Borromeo vs. Mariano (42 Phil. 322), appointment has been defined as "the act of designation by the executive officer to whom that power has been delegated, of the individual who is to exercise the functions of a given office" (underlining ours). In this regard, it is clear, therefore, that the Punong Barangay, in issuing the appointments to the Barangay Treasurer and Barangay Secretary, is doing so in his capacity as local chief executive of the barangay government and not as Presiding Officer of the Sangguniang Barangay. In such capacity as chief executive, the appointing discretion is exercised solely by him as to who should be selected to perform and exercise the functions of a given office. Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Government Code, these appointments, however, are to be submitted to the Sangguniang Barangay for concurrence. In the issuance or non-issuance of the concurrence, the Sangguniang Barangay shall be guided solely by its evaluation of whether the appointees possess the statutorily required qualifications under the Local Government Code for the positions (please see Sec. 394 and 395 of