REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

01 July 2008

HON. MA. CHONA M. DIMAYUGA
Sangguniang Panlalawigan Member
Provincial Capitol Building
Capitol Site, Batangas City

Dear SP Member Dimayuga:

This has reference to your letter requesting for this Department's legal opinion regarding the Resolution passed by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of that province.

You stated that in a special session held on 05 February 2008, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan passed "A Resolution Authorizing Governor Vilma Santos Recto To Enter Into Compromise Agreements With Tax Delinquents, Subject To The Ratification Of The Sangguniang Panlalawigan".

You allegedly opposed the passage of the said Resolution on the ground that any compromise agreements will result to a reduction or condonation of provincial taxes and will contravene an existing provincial ordinance. Such being the case, a mere Resolution will not suffice; reduction or condonation of real property taxes are only allowed under Sections 276 and 277 of the Local Government Code; under Sections 132 and 192 of the same Code, taxation and/or tax reliefs are legislative functions and as such, cannot be delegated to the Governor; and assuming that it can be delegated, the delegation should be complete in all its essential terms and conditions so that there will be nothing left for the delegate to do but to enforce it in accordance with the established standards set therein.

It is now your contention that said Resolution passed by that
Sangguniang is ultra vires because: (a) it is a mere Resolution; (b) the intention to enter into compromise agreements with delinquent taxpayers is a dangerous practice of tax collection as taxes should be uniform and not on a case to case basis, negotiated tax compromise will open the floodgates to graft and corruption; (c) the Resolution, even if it can be considered a valid delegation, did not set any standards on how the compromises can be implemented. The clause "subject to the ratification of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan" is not the completeness and boundaries required of a valid delegation.

In reply, please be informed that we concur with your observations. The subject Resolution indeed appears to be ultra vires in all respects. In the case of Municipality of Parañaque vs. V.M. Realty Corporation (G.R. No. 127820, 20 July 1988), the Supreme Court had the occasion to distinguish an ordinance from a resolution, in this manner: "an ordinance is a law but a resolution is merely a declaration of the sentiment or opinion of a law making body on a specific matter; an ordinance possesses a general and permanent character but a resolution is temporary in nature; an ordinance provides a permanent rule of conduct or action but a resolution provides a mere opinion or view and temporary in character". Additionally, "the two are enacted differently - third reading is necessary for an ordinance but not for a resolution, unless decided otherwise by a majority of all the Sangguniang members". In this regard, once a provincial ordinance is approved, nothing is left to the Governor except his/her duty, relative to the governance of the province, to enforce and execute the approved ordinance in accordance with the terms and conditions thereof [Sec. 465 (b) (2), Local Government Code].

We fully concur with your first observation that conferment to the Governor of the power to enter into compromise agreements with tax delinquents cannot be done through a mere resolution. It is worth noting that with regard to Provincial Tax Ordinance No. 5, s. 2004, nothing is left anymore to be done by the Governor except to implement and execute the same pursuant to Section 465 (b) (2) of the Local Government Code. It bears to emphasize however, that the said ordinance did not confer unto the Governor the power to enter into compromise agreements with tax delinquents. Accordingly, in furtherance to the enforcement of the said tax ordinance, a subsequent Resolution authorizing the Governor to enter into