Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapapamahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG OPINION NO. 16, S. 2006
March 13, 2006

DR. AMANDA T. CRUZ
President, SPKKK
No. 12 Don Doroteo St.,
Don Enrique Hts., Quezon City

Dear Dr. Cruz:

This pertains to your letter requesting for a legal opinion on whether or not a local government unit can, without any court order, demolish privately-owned structures situated over a land not owned by the local government unit concerned.

Please be informed of the instances where a city mayor can order the demolition of structures as set out under Section 455 (3) (vi) of the Local Government Code (RA 7160) and Section 27 in relation to 28 of the Urban Development and Housing Act (RA 7279). It respectively provide, thus:

"SECTION 455. xxx (a) The city mayor, as the chief executive of the city government, shall xxx

(vi) Require owners of illegally constructed houses, buildings or other structures to obtain the necessary permit, subject to such fines and penalties as may be imposed by law or ordinance, or to make necessary changes in the construction of the same when said construction violates any law or ordinance, or to order the demolition or removal of said house, building or structure within the period prescribed by law or ordinance." (RA 7160)

"SEC. 27. Action Against Professional Squatters and Squatting Syndicates.- The local government units xxx shall adopt measures to identify and effectively install the nefarious and illegal activities of professional squatters and squatting syndicates, as herein defined.

Any person or group identified as such shall be summarily evicted and their dwellings or structures demolished xxx

SEC. 28. Eviction and Demolition.- Eviction or demolition as a practice shall be discouraged. Eviction and demolition, however, may be allowed under the following situations:

(a) When the persons or entities occupy danger areas such as esteros, railroad tracks, garbage dumps, riverbanks, shorelines, waterways and other public places such as sidewalks, roads, parks and playgrounds;
(b) When government infrastructure projects with available funding are about to be implemented xxx." (RA 7279)

Accordingly, even without a court order, the mayor may order the demolition of structures when the same are: 1) constructed without the necessary mayor's permit; 2) the structures were constructed in violation of any law or ordinance. Additionally, even without a court order, the city mayor may also order the summary eviction and demolition of structures occupied by professional squatters and squatting syndicates as defined under Sec. 27 of RA 7279 after they shall have been identified as such; 3) when the structures occupied by persons are situated in danger areas such as esteros, railroad tracks, garbage dumps, riverbanks, shorelines, waterways and other public places such as sidewalks, roads, parks and playgrounds; or 4) when the government infrastructure projects with available funding are about to be implemented. Outside of the above instances, the mayor cannot order the demolition of structures without order from the court.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,
WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal/68
cc: Dir. Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG-NCR