Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

February 14, 2007

DIRECTOR RODOLFO Z. RAZUL
DILG Regional Office No. 11
Davao City

Dear Director Razul:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking for clarification on
the participation of barangay officials on the forthcoming May 14, 2007
National and Local Elections, specifically on the following issues, to wit:

"1) Is there any liability on the part of the
barangay official who affiliates himself and become a
member of a political party? Can he be administratively
liable? Can this be a cause of his disqualification?

2) With regard to the elected official who
induced the barangay officials to become a member of a
political party, can he be held administratively liable
for his actions?"

These queries may have been brought about by your apprehension
of Section 38 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 881, otherwise known as the
Omnibus Election Code, RA 6679, otherwise known as "An Act Amending
Republic Act No. 6653 to Postpone the Barangay Elections to
March 28, 1989, Prescribing Additional Rules Governing the
Conduct of Barangay Elections and For Other Purposes", and
Section 1 of COMELEC Resolution No. 2888 dated February 05, 1997, which
are consistent in providing that barangay elections are non-partisan in
nature. Your apprehensions are further compounded by the recent
COMELEC Resolution No. 7798 dated January 05, 2007, where barangay
officials are prohibited to be appointed as members of the Board of
Election Inspectors or as official watchers of duly registered major political
parties or any similar organizations of which they are members in
connection with the May 14, 2007 national and local elections.

You further centered your query on the legal repercussion of the
acts of those elective barangay officials who become members of a
political party.

In reply to your first set of queries, we answer all in the negative.
May we invite your attention to Section 38, Omnibus Election Code (BP
881), which provides:

"Section 38. Conduct of elections.- The barangay
election shall be non-partisan and shall be conducted in
an expeditious and inexpensive manner.

No person who files a certificate of candidacy
shall represent or allow himself to be represented as a
candidate of any political party or any other
organization; and no political party, political group,
political committee, civic, religious, professional, or
other organization or organized group of whatever
nature shall intervene in his nomination or in the filing
of his certificate of candidacy or give aid or support,
directly or indirectly, material or otherwise favorable to
or against his campaign for election: Provided, That
this provision shall not apply to the members of the
family of a candidate within the fourth civil degree of
consanguinity or affinity nor to the personal campaign
staff of the candidate which shall not be more than one
for every one hundred registered voters in his barangay.
Provided, however, That without prejudice to any
liability that may be incurred, no permit to hold a
public meeting shall be denied on the ground that the
provisions of this paragraph may or will be violated.

Nothing in this section, however, shall be
construed as in any manner affecting or constituting an
impairment of the freedom of individuals to support or
oppose any candidate for any barangay office." (Emphasis Supplied)

Based on the foregoing, any person who files a certificate of
candidacy for any elective barangay position are prohibited from
representing or allowing himself to be represented as a candidate of any
political party or any other organization. The law is explicit in saying that
the prohibition applies only at the time of filing of a candidate's certificate
of candidacy for elective barangay position. Thus, it is clear that under
prohibited under the law is for a person to run and be elected in a barangay
elective position under a political party.

Nowhere can we find in the aforementioned provisions of law that the
prohibition on partisanship shall be made general so as to encompass
absolute prohibition against barangay elective officials from affiliating and
ultimately, becoming members of any political party. On the contrary, there
are many legal justifications to conclude that, in fact, they can
affiliate.

First, to conclude that barangay elective officials are prohibited from
affiliating and becoming members of any political party would be violative
of the right of any person to associate as guaranteed under Section 8,
Article III of the 1987 Constitution, which provides:

"Section 8. The right of the people, including
those employed in the public and private sectors, to
form unions, associations or societies for purposes not
contrary to law shall not be abridged."