Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

21  ---  6 ---
April 17, 2006

MAYOR JUANITA C. MANZANA
Pangil, Laguna

Dear Mayor Manzana:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on certain legal questions arising from your municipality's "Programa Para sa Pabahay" project (Project).

Per your letter, your municipality purchased two parcels of land in furtherance to your Project. In the meantime, a municipal ordinance was passed awarding the parcels of land to the legitimate constituents who are actually residing therein. Said residents then organized themselves and formed the LUZVIMIN Homeowners' Association. The members of the Association were then required to come up with the structural map and subdivision plan for the purpose of individual titling of their assigned lots. This endeavor, however, would require P100,000 for the actual individual survey and subdivision planning of the two parcels of land. Since the members cannot come up with the said amount, arrangement was made where your municipality will grant a loan of the same amount to finance the undertaking.

By reason of the plan to grant the loan, Sangguniang Bayan Member Eugene Reniva sought the legal opinion of the Provincial Legal Officer of Laguna who rendered his advise that the granting of loan to the homeowners' association cannot be made in view of the provision of Section 335 of RA 7160 which states that:

"No public money or property shall be appropriated or applied for religious or private purposes."

In view of the opinion rendered by your Provincial Legal Officer, your action on the "Pabahay" Program has been suspended. Thus, your instant query.

In reply thereto, please be informed that the Local Government Code expressly vests upon local government units the power and authority to acquire and alienate or otherwise dispose of real or personal properties held by them in their proprietary capacity [Sec. 18, Local Government Code].

Such is an express grant of corporate power unto the LGUs as a corporate entity. It bears stressing that local government units are endowed with both governmental and corporate powers to be exercised as a political subdivision of the National Government and as a corporate entity representing the inhabitants of its territory [Sec. 15, Local Government Code]. As a corporate entity, the Supreme Court in the case of "Bara Lidasan vs. COMELEC" (21 SCRA, 496), held that it is a separate entity for its own purposes, and not as a subdivision of the state. Section 22 (a) (6) of the Local Government Code on that point explicitly empowers local government units to exercise powers as are granted to corporation subject, however to the limitations provided in the Local Government Code and other laws. Hence, the Program Para sa Pabahay which was initiated through an ordinance is within the power of the municipality to undertake.

On that score, it is not amiss to point out that the intended "survey and subdivision planning" for purposes of individually titling the land to the homeowners, is a necessary incident to the pabahay program of your municipality. Such being the case, while the proposal to survey and provide subdivision plan on the parcel of land for individual titling thereof had been initiated by the private homeowners' association, such undertaking can be considered a continuation or a necessary implication of the municipality's program. To entirely disavow such duty and pass the same to the marginalized beneficiaries of the pabahay program will consequently render inutile the purpose of the program itself, which is to give shelter to the homeless.

Simply put, the survey, planning and titling of the land are contemporaneous consequences of the pabahay program of the municipality, thus, making it a governmental function, albeit, with modification.