Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

A. Francisco Gold Condominium IL EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

nyt

tn tegy
ce tiiigad tat
Te? REST Cake Nab ae

25

25 November 2005

/ ATTY. ROSARIO H. AMATONG-BUENDIA
Executive Director
Reference and Research Bureau
House of Representatives
Batasan Complex, Constitution Hills
Diliman, Quezon City

Dear Atty. Buendia:

This refers to your letter, seeking this Department's

Opinion and

interpretation of Section 12, Article X of the 1987 Constitution vis-a-vis Section
452 (c), Chapter 1, Title Three, Book III of the Local Government Code of 1991.

According to you, both provisions deal on the participation or non-

participation of voters of highly urbanized cities in the elections of provincial
elective officials.

issues:

1. “Is the prohibition on HUCs re participation of their voters in

provincial election absolute? Please expound.

Voters of one HUC have been found to enjoy their right to vote
in provincial elections as provided by their City Charter.
(Attachment A). This was further confirmed by the documents
provided by the COMELEC which show that voters in this HUC
did participate in the provincial election held last May 2004.
(Attachment B).

. This city was converted to HUC on February 15, 1991.

(Attachment C). Section 96 of Republic Act No. 5519, the
City’s Charter, was amended by Republic Act No. 6641 on
December 23, 1987 to allow the voters in the city to participate
in the provincial election. (Attachment D).

Why are the voters of this HUC allowed to vote in provincial
elections?

- Can other HUCs amend their charter to allow their voters to

participate in provincial elections? — If not, what makes their
situation different from the first cited HUC? (#2)

Along that premise, you would now like to be enlightened on the following

-2-

4. May the voters of the HUC, which is the capital of a province,
set to be divided, be allowed to participate in the plebiscite to be
held for the purpose? If not, what recourse can they take being
directly affected by the proposed division?”

Before we dwell on our position, please allow us to discuss the nature of
cities and how are they classified under the law.

Section 451 of the Local Government Code classifies a city as either a
component city or a highly urbanized city. Component cities are cities whose
Charter allows (or contains no such prohibition) its voters to vote for elective
positions in the province in which they are geographically located. The same
section, on the other hand, provides that component cities whose Charters
prohibit their voters from voting for elective provincial officials are called
independent component cities.

It is, therefore, worth noting that Section 451 of the Local Government
Code classified cities into only two, namely: component and highly urbanized
cities, and that component cities are further classified into component cities or
independent component cities, depending on whether or not its Charter allows or
does not allow its voters to vote for elective provincial positions.

Section 452 of the same Code, on the other hand, provides for the
verifiable indicators, such as the required income and population, under which
component cities or independent component cities may apply and qualify for
conversion into a highly urbanized city.

Section 453 of the same Code inandates that it shall be the duty of the
President to declare a city as highly urbanized city within thirty (30) days after it
shall have met the minimum requirements prescribed in Section 452, upon proper
application therefor, and ratification in a plebiscite by the qualified voters therein.

A study of the old provisions of the Local Government Code, which is Batas
Pambansa Blg. 337, would yield similar provisions, except that under the old Local
Government Code, the duty to convert a city into a highly urbanized city was
conferred to the Minister of Local Government and no plebiscite was required. It
is clear from the foregoing that in conversion to a highly urbanized city, it Is
immaterial whether a city is Component or independent component since either of
them may apply for conversion for as Icng as they comply with the requirements
set forth by law. At this point, may we restate Section 12, Article X of the 1987
Constitution and Section 452 (c) of the Local Government Code, thus:

“ART. X, SEC. 12. Cities that are highly
urbanized, as determined by law, and component cities
whose charters Prohibit their voters from voting for
provincial elective officials, shall be independent of the
province. The voters of component cities within a
Province, whose charters contain no such prohibition,
shall not be deprived of their right to vote for elective
provincial officials,” (1987 Constitution)

“SEC. 452. Highly Urbanized Cities.. (c) Qualified

-3-

voters of highly urbanized cities shall remain excluded
from voting for elective provincial officials.

Unless otherwise provided in the Constitution or
this Code, qualified voters of independent component
cities shall be governed by their respective charters, as
amended, on the participation of voters in provincial
elections.

Qualified voters of cities who acquired the right to
vote for elective provincial officials prior to the
classification of said cities as highly urbanized after
the ratification of the Constitution and before the
effectivity of this Code, shall continue to exercise such
right.” (Local Government Code)

Hence, going now to your first query as to whether or not “the
prohibition of highly urbanized cities re participation of their
voters for provincial election is absolute”, we answer qualifiedly. It is
noted that a careful study of the old Local Government Code (Batas Pambansa
Blg. 337), the new Local Government Code (RA 7160), and even the provisions of
the Constitutions adverted to above, yielded no express provision that prohibits
qualified voters of highly urbanized cities to vote for provincial elective positions.
What Section 12, Article X of the 1987 Constitution simply provided is that, highly
urbanized cities are independent from the province. To our mind, _ this
independence pertains only to the administrative relationship between the city
and the province, referring in particular the exercise of administrative supervision
of the province over its component cities and municipalities. Pertaining as it does
to the exercise of the right of suffrage, it should be construed strictly and thus,
should not be stretched further in a manner as to affect the right of its qualified
voters to vote or not to vote in the election of provincial elective positions.
Therefore, being independent, a highly urbanized city is not within the power of
general supervision of the province. In the same vein, Section 452 of the Local
Government Code did not also contain an express prohibition that voters of highly
urbanized cities are prohibited to vote for provincial elective offiials. It simply
provided that qualified voters of highly urbanized cities shall remain excluded
from voting for provincial elective positions.

With the foregoing discussion, we believe that in determining as to whether
or not voters of highly urbanized cities are allowed to vote for provincial elective
positions, the Charter of the component city or independent component city
concerned is the governing law on the matter. It bears stressing that the Charter,
which is the substantive law with regard to its creation as such, is not amended or
repealed accordingly when said city is converted into a highly urbanized city. To
our mind, it seems that the last paragraph of paragraph (c) of Section 452 of the
Local Government Code would like to impress upon us that once a city is
converted into a highly urbanized city after the effectivity of the Local
Government Code, the voters of the newly converted highly urbanized city are
already deprived to vote for provincial elective officials, regardless of the City
Charter. However, we would like to take exception on this. The 1° paragraph of
Section 452 of the Code cannot be considered as an express positive prohibition
for voters in highly urbanized city to vote for elective provincial officials. It is

-4-

even vague since there is no law or even provision in the Constitution that
prohibits voters of highly urbanized cities to vote for elective provincial officials.
Hence, there is no exact reference why the first paragraph would say “shall
remain excluded”. Right of suffrage insofar as the voters are concerned
should be liberally construed. Hence, said phrase should not be construed as to
deprive or limit the voters of highly urbanized city to exercise their right of
suffrage. Hence, we are of the honest belief that notwithstanding the first
paragraph of Section 452 (c) of the Code, it would still be the Charter that will
prevail. It is noted that as stated above, conversion of a city into a highly
urbanized city is done only through an executive fiat and, hence, cannot amend or
repeal the substantive rights of the voters under the Charter, which is an Act of
Congress. Accordingly, even if already converted into a highly urbanized city, if
the voters of the city are given the right to vote for elective provincial officials
under the Charter which created it, then they can continue to exercise the same
notwithstanding the conversion.

With regard to your second query, asking why the voters of a particular
highly urbanized city were allowed to vote in provincial elections in the last May
2004 elections, we could only surmise that your query may be answered in the
light of the foregoing discussion. In the scenario you have given, it is noted that
the Charter of the city you were referring to, although you did not mention the
name of the city, was amended by a later law on 23 December 1987 which
allowed the voters in the city to participate in the provincial elections. The same
city was later on converted into a highly urbanized city in 15 February 1991.

It bears stressing that the conversion of a city into a highly urbanized city
will not affect the rights of the voters therein to vote for provincial officials.
What is only affected is the administrative relationship between the province and
the component city, such that if the component city is converted into a highly
urbanized city, it is already independent from provincial supervision. This is
precisely the reason why in the last paragraph of Section 452 of the Local
Government Code, the law provides that notwithstanding the conversion of the
city into a highly urbanized city, the voters therein shall continue to exercise their

right to vote for provincial elective positions as the same was expressly granted
prior to its conversion.

With regard to your third query seeking clarification as to whether HUCs
can amend their charters to allow their voters to participate in provincial
elections. If not, what makes their situation different from the aforecited HUC
you mentioned in your query. Please be informed that we see no legal or
constitutional violation should highly urbanized cities amend their Charters to
allow their voters to vote in the provincial elective positions. As earlier discussed,
there is nothing in Section 12 of the Constitution as aforequoted that would give
us an express provision that prohibited voters of highly urbanized cities to vote for
elective provincial positions. What it simply provided is the severance of the
administrative relationship between the component city and the provincial
government after its conversion into a highly urbanized city. There being no
constitutional prohibition, then we see no violation of the Constitution if a law is
later on passed amending a Charter of a highly urbanized city to the effect of
allowing its voters to participate in the provincial elections. It will not even
violate Section 452 (c) of the Code since the word “remain” found in the first
sentence of paragraph (c) of Section 452 of the Code, to our mind, is more of a

transition rather than a prohibition.

With regard to your last query, may we quote Section 10, Article X of the
1987 Constitution and Section 10 of the Local Government Code, thus:

“ART. X, SEC. 10. No province, city, municipality,
or barangay may be created, divided, merged,
abolished, or its boundary substantially altered, except
in accordance with the criteria established in the local
government code and subject to approval by a majority
of the votes cast in a plebiscite in the political units
directly affected.” (1 987 Constitution)

“GEC. 10. Plebiscite Requirement.- No creation,
division, merger, abolition, or substantial alteration of
boundaries of local government units shall take effect
unless approved by 4 majority of the votes cast in a
plebiscite called for the purpose in the political unit or
units directly affected. Said plebiscite shall be
conducted by the Commission on Elections (Comelec)
within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of
effectivity of the law or ordinance @. ffecting such
action, unless said law or ordinance fixes another
date.” (RA 7160)

Verily, the aforequoted provisions consistently used the phrase “political

units directly affected” hence the need to scrutinize what being “directly
affected” refers to.

Being “directly affected” may either refer to economic, geographic or
political. Insofar as being geographically affected is concerned, it is beyond doubt
that any kind of LGU within a province is necessarily geographically affected if
the boundaries of the province where they belong ts divided and altered. in
connection with the economic aspect, indubitably, highly urbanized cities are
unaffected, since it is rather clear that highly urbanized cities do not receive any
share of the wealth or income from the province.

With regard to the political aspect, may we first lay down certain points,
VIZ:

ELECTION, strictly speaking, «s the means by which the people choose
their officials for a definite and fixed period and to whom they entrust, for the
time being, as their representatives, the exercise of powers of government
(Garchitorena vs. Crescini, 39 Phil. 258). lt involves the choice or selection of
candidates to public office by popular vote (Taule vs. Santos, 200 SCRA 512).

PLEBISCITE, on the other hand, refers to a vote of the people expressing
their choice for or against a proposed law or enactment, submitted to them, and
which, if adopted, will work a change in the Constitution, or which is beyond the
powers of the regular legislative body (Black’s Law Dictionary, 6" Ed.). In the
Philippines, the plebiscite is applied to an election at which any proposed
amendment to, or revision of, the Constitution is submitted to the people for

-_ ° 6 .
ratification. Under our Constitution, it is also required to sectire the approval of
the people directly affected, before certain proposed changes affecting local
government units may be implemented (De Leon and De Leon, jr., The Law On
Public Officers and Election Law, 3" Ed., p. 412).

Accordingly, from the foregoing definition, it is clear that the power of the
people to vote in a plebiscite is an exercise of a political right, which is available
to everybody regardless of whether their residence is a municipality, independent
component city, component city or highly urbanized.

Hence, if the voters of a highly urbanized city are allowed by their Charters
to vote for provincial officials, which as we have said earlier is feasible, then the
same voters should likewise be allowed to vote during the plebiscite, lest their
political rights be trampled upon. Being politically affected, therefore, is enough
ground to allow the voters therein to vote during the plebiscite.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

eee

ANGELO T. REYES
secretary

Reyblie of le Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
AWD LOCAL GOVERNMENT

IN REPLYING, PLS CITE:

SILG05-009940

UA

Legal:43/La

