Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA - 
corner Mapagmalah St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG (OPINION) NO. 32 S. 2007

January 17, 2007

HON. LORETO T. BHAGWANI, MNSA, CESO IV
Regional Director
DILG, Region IX
Zamboanga City

Dear Hon. Bhagwani:

This refers to your 1st Indorsement dated 11 September 2006,
wherein you referred to us for our opinion the issue on the mandatory
representation of ICCs/IPs to the city and barangay legislative councils in
Zamboanga City pursuant to Section 16 of RA 8371, otherwise known as "The
Indigenous Peoples Rights Act of 1997."

As a backgrounder thereof, your Office, through the Office of the
Mayor of Zamboanga City, received a letter dated 26 July 2006 from Atty.
Norberto Patriarca of the City Legal Office of the same City, seeking the
representation of ICCs/IPs in the city and barangay legislative councils in
Zamboanga City in view of the fact that the City Legal Office has no idea on
how to determine the number of ICC/IP representatives to the local
legislative councils, the appropriate measures in determining proportionate
representation and the qualifications of the said representatives, among
others.

At the outset, please be reminded that this Department has
consistently opined that representation of ICCs/IPs in the local legislative
councils is mandatory. This is enshrined by no less than the 1987
Constitution, which underscored the importance of preserving and protecting
the rights of the indigenous cultural communities. With this constitutional
mandate, Congress enacted the IPRA Law, thereby fleshing out Section
446(b) of the Local Government Code (RA 7160), granting said ICCs/IPs
sectoral representation in the local sanggunians.

Unfortunately, no specific rules have been issued yet with respect to
the selection or election of ICC/IP representatives vis-Ã -vis the sectoral
representation in the local sanggunians. Please note that the primary
implementing agency of the IPRA Law is the NCIP, as per the law itself. But
because the matter of sectoral representation is likewise provided for in RA
7160, or the Local Government Code, this Department deems it appropriate
to coordinate with the NCIP on the measures to be observed to ensure
proper and lawful representation of ICCs/IPs in every local legislative
council. Thus, while this Department and the NCIP have already agreed in
principles to coordinate with each other for the issuance of a Joint
Memorandum Circular stating the specific guidelines and measures in order
to implement the constitutional mandate of ICC/IP representation in local
legislative councils, there is as yet no such circular. However, we wish to
underscore the fact that our position remains that said representation is
mandatory and the same should be implemented notwithstanding the absence
of specific rules and guidelines on the matter.

In fact, the Department has rendered an opinion (DILG Opinion No.
46, 2005) wherein we recognized the assumption of the ICC/IP
representative in the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, sitting as sectoral member
thereof, in view of the certification issued by the Local NCIP Regional IX
Director Celestino D. Talpis, Sr. attesting to the fact that Mr. Sanggyan
was legally chosen as IP representative by the tribal people of Zamboanga
Sibugay in accordance with the mandate of RA 8371 as to the manner of
selection. Significantly, Governor Hofer also recognized and accepted said
sectoral representative.

Given the foregoing, and without prejudice to the position of the
NCIP and pending the issuance by the NCIP of the Rules and Regulations on
the matter, it is our opinion that, in the meantime, issues relative to the
representation of ICCs/IPs are best left to the sound discretion of the local
government unit concerned, particularly its local legislative council, in
consultation and coordination with the appropriate local NCIP office.

We hope we have enlightened you on this matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary