REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

March 01, 2007

DR. MICHAELITO BENOZA
Punong Barangay
Barangay Marulas, Valenzuela City

Dear Sir:

This is a rejoinder to your letter dated 8 December 2006 where you
inquired on whether or not Kagawad Danilo Alonzo may still remain as Barangay
Kagawad despite being convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude pursuant
to Section 50 (b) (5) of RA 7160 (The Local Government Code).

You stated that Kag. Alonzo was convicted by final judgment on
November 14, 2003 for Violation of B.P. 22, which according to you, is a crime
involving moral turpitude.

The disputed Section in part reads thus:

"xxxx Provided further, that a member convicted by final
judgment to imprisonment of at least one (1) year for any crime
involving moral turpitude, shall be automatically expelled from the
Sangguniang." (underlining mine)

It is clear therefore that before this provision finds application, two
requisites must perforce concur: first, that the Offender must have been
convicted by final judgment to imprisonment of at least one year, second, that
the same should be for a crime involving moral turpitude.

Applying these requisites in the case at bar, it is without doubt that the
prohibition does not apply. While conviction under BP 22 remains as one
involving moral turpitude, it does not appear that Kag. Alonzo was sentenced to
suffer an imprisonment of at least one year for the same offense. This is clear
from the fallo or dispositive portion which reads thus:

"WHEREFORE, the assailed decision is MODIFIED by deleting
the prison sentence of one year and in its stead, imposing a fine of
P200,000.00 and subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency.
The award of civil indemnity made by the trial court in favor of
private complainant is AFFIRMED. Costs against petitioner.

SO ORDERED."

Wherefore, on the basis of the foregoing, we are of the view that Sec. 50
(b) (5) of the Local Government Code cannot be made to apply in the case of
Brgy. Kagawad Aionzo.

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary
Legal: 09/corz