Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. MapagkNahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

07 February 2006

VICE GOVERNOR RAMON G. LACBAIN II
Provincial Capitol Building
Iba, Zambales

Dear Sir:

This refers to your request for this Department's legal opinion
regarding the powers vested by law to an Acting Vice Governor during the
official absence of the incumbent Vice Governor, the latter being on official
travel abroad.

A perusal of your letter also reveals your intent to inquire as to
whether or not the Acting Vice Governor can request for the
realignment/transfer of funds from the offices of the Vice Governor and
Sangguniang Panlalawigan to the Office of the Governor.

In the meantime, your attachments disclose that in many instances,
the Acting Vice Governor requested for a reversion of funds from either the
offices of the Vice Governor and the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for
"re-appropriation" as:

1. Intelligence fund of the Office of the Governor;
2. Indigency Fund of the Office of the Governor;
3. "Donations" of the Office of the Vice Governor.

Acting on the said requests of the Acting Vice Governor, the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan enacted Resolutions authorizing the realignments
and ordinances reverting certain funds and re-appropriating the same for
other purposes.

Hence, upon your return, the remaining fund of your office as of 23
December 2005 is P200.00.

Hence, your letter.

In reply to your query as to the extent of authority enjoyed by an
Acting Vice Governor, please be informed at the outset that the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), particularly Section 46 (a) thereof,
does not explicitly provide for a rule of succession in case of temporary
vacancy in the position of the Vice Governor. The Code only provides for
the rule of succession for the same office in case of permanent vacancy
therein, as found in Section 44 thereof.

However, in the case of Menzon vs. Petilla (G.R. No. 90762, 20 May
1991), while the Supreme Court recognized the silence of the Local
Government Code as to the mode of succession in case of temporary
vacancy in the office of the Vice Governor, it nonetheless ruled that, in order
to obviate the dilemma resulting from an interregnum created by the
temporary vacancy in the said office, the mode of succession provided for
permanent vacancy for the same office under Section 44 of the same Code
should be made to apply.

Hence, if a temporary vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice
Governor, such as for his travel abroad, the first highest ranking
Sangguniang Panlalawigan Member, or in case of his inability, the second
highest ranking sangguniang member, shall temporarily perform and
discharge the functions of the Vice Governor in accordance with the rule set
under Section 44 of the Local Government Code.

Therefore, an Acting Vice Governor is mandated to perform the duties
and responsibilities of the office he/she is temporarily holding. May we
note, however, that being an Acting Vice Governor does not automatically
vest upon the said official the power to preside over the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan.

In the case of Gamboa vs. Aguirre and Araneta (G.R. No. 134213, 20
July 1999), the Supreme Court held that: "The creation of a temporary
vacancy in the office of the governor creates a corresponding temporary
vacancy in the office of the vice governor whenever the latter acts as
governor by virtue of such temporary vacancy. This event constitutes an
"inability" on the part of the regular presiding officer to preside during the
sangguniang sessions which thus calls for the operation of the remedy set in
Section 49 (b) of the Local Government Code concerning the election of a
temporary presiding officer. The continuity of the acting governor's (vice
governor) powers as presiding officer of the sangguniang panlalawigan is
suspended as long as he is in such capacity".

Verily, the above doctrinal pronouncement is applicable in situations
where the Vice Governor's office is itself temporarily vacant.

As regards the issue on realignment/transfer of funds undertaken by
the Acting Vice Governor during your travel abroad, we noticed that aside
from realignment, there was a reversion of funds, which are distinct from
one another.

Realignment/transfer of funds pertains to the authority of the Local
Chief Executive or the Presiding Officer of the sanggunian, acting pursuant
to an ordinance, to augment any item in the approved annual budget for:
(1) their respective offices; and (2) from savings in other items within the
same expense class of their respective appropriations (Sec. 336, Local
Government Code).

Ergo, for a realignment of funds to be valid, the following requisites
must concur: