Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

GOVERNOR JOSE R. CABALLERO
Provincial Capitol Building
Cabidianan, Nabunturan
Compostela Valley

Dear Governor Caballero:

This pertains to your request for this Department's legal opinion on whether or not authority of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan is a condition precedent before the Governor can enter into a contract with a winning bidder as determined by the Bids and Awards Committee after going through the process of procurement mandated by RA 9184, otherwise known as the "Government Procurement Reform Act". Your instant query is anchored on the facts you have presented which are reproduced in toto, viz:

"The Provincial Government of Compostela Valley pursuant to the rules and regulations for procurement activities opened the bids for Purchase Request Number 05-1275, entitled: "For the Purchase of Provision of Security and Protective Services (Contract for Security Services, for brevity) on May 9, 2005 but was deferred to May 20, 2005 due to requests for reconsideration.

On May 27, 2005, the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) recommended to the Honorable Governor to award the said contract in favor of the winning bidder, the Columbia Security Agency, which recommendation was then duly approved by the Honorable Governor on June 24, 2005.

In the meantime, on June 17, 2005, the BAC through Anesio M. Ranario, Provincial Administrator, endorsed to the SANGGUNIANG PANLALAWIGAN (SP) the contract for the purpose of seeking authority in order for the governor to sign the same. Up to the present, no contract has been signed by the Governor in view of the absence of authority from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, since the Sangguniang Panlalawigan is just sitting on it for no apparent reasons."

On these facts, you have interposed the following queries, to wit:

1. "Is there a prescriptive period that the Sangguniang Panlalawigan should act on request for authority of the governor to sign a contract, otherwise, said request is deemed approved and that governor can now sign the contract sans SP authorization to prevent prejudice to the public service?

2. In the same manner, I would like to request the legal opinion of the DILG how tenable is the argument of some legal minds that there is no need to seek authorization from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan on contracts arising from the procurement process for the following reasons."

In addressing the aforestated issues, it is imperative to cite certain provisions under the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) and the Government Procurement Reform Act (RA 9184), for your better appreciation of our opinion.

A LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE provisions:

"SEC. 22. (c) Unless otherwise provided in this Code, no contract may be entered into by the local chief executive in behalf of the local government unit without prior authorization by the sangguniang concerned. A legible copy of such contract shall be posted at a conspicuous place in the provincial capitol or the city, municipal or barangay hall." (underlining ours)

"SEC. 465 (b) (1) (vi). The provincial governor shall: xxx Represent the province in all its business transactions and sign in its behalf all bonds, contracts, and obligations, and such other documents upon authority of the sangguniang panlalawigan or pursuant to law or ordinance."

B GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT REFORM ACT provisions:

"SEC. 5. (a) Approved Budget for the Contract - refers to the budget for the contract duly approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity, as provided for in the General Appropriations Act and/or continuing appropriations, in the case of National Government Agencies; the Corporate Budget for the contract approved by the governing boards, pursuant to E.O. No. 518, series of 1979, in the case of Government-Owned and/or Controlled Corporations, Government Financial Institutions and State Universities and Colleges; and the Budget for the contract approved by the respective Sanggunians, in the case of Local Government Units." (underlining ours)

"SEC. 5. (j) Head of the Procuring Entity - refers to (i) the head of the agency or his duly authorized