REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

02 July 2007

MESSRS. JAMES L. ENGLE,
FEDERICO O. DIMPAS, JR.,
MARIFE G. RONDINA,
PORFERIO D. DELA CRUZ, and
WINSTON B. MENZON
Sangguniang Bayan Members
Babaton, Leyte

Dear Gentlemen and Lady:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our opinion on several issues, which we quoted herein in toto:

"(1) What is the number that would determine the quorum of our sangguniang that has a total membership of eleven (11) including the vice-mayor? 

(2) Are the resolutions adopted by a sangguniang without quorum valid?"

In reply to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 446 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) which provides and we quote:

"SECTION 446. Composition. - (a) The body of the municipality, shall be composed of the municipal vice-mayor as the presiding officer, the regular sangguniang members, the president of the municipal chapter of the liga ng mga barangay, the president of the pambayang

- 2 -

pederasyon ng mga sangguniang kabataan, and the sectoral representatives, as members."

Based on the aforementioned provision, the Sangguniang Bayan is composed of eight (8) regular members, the Liga ng mga Barangay President, the SK Federation President, the Vice-Mayor as Presiding Officer and the sectoral representatives.

Under the old Local Government Code (Batas Pambansa Blg. 337), the Presiding Officer then of the sangguniang was the Mayor. Thus, there was a dilemma as to whether or not the Vice-Mayor, as Presiding Officer, is to be included in the determination of quorum in the sangguniang Bayan. This issue was, however, resolved with the advent of the new Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) providing the aforementioned provision. Hence, the vice-mayor is included in the determination of a quorum in the sangguniang.

Based on the aforementioned provision, sectoral representatives are also included in the determination of quorum in the sangguniang bayan. Let it be noted however that sectoral representatives in the local sanggunians are, 

elected "in a manner as may be provided for by law". Meantime the manner of electing the sectoral representatives at the local sanggunians, however, Congress has yet to enact a law providing for the sectoral representatives at the local sanggunians. 

In view of the foregoing, the Sangguniang Bayan is composed of the 8 regular members, the Liga ng mga Barangay President and the SK Federation President as ex-officio members, and the Vice-Mayor as Presiding Officer. The total membership in that sangguniang, therefore, is eleven (11). Relative thereto, Section 53 of the Local Government Code of 1991 provides that a majority of all the members of the sangguniang who have been elected and qualified shall constitute a quorum to transact official business. "Majority" has been defined in Santiago vs. Guingona, et al. (G. R. No. 134577, 18 November 1998) as that which is greater than half of the membership of the body. Following the said ruling, since the total membership of the sangguniang being 11, 11 divided by 2 will give us a quotient of 5.5. Let it be noted however that a fraction cannot be considered as one whole vote, since it is physically and legally impossible to divide a person or even his vote into a fractional part. Accordingly, we have to go up to the next whole number which is 6. In this regard, 6 is more than 5.5 and therefore, more than one half of the total membership of the sangguniang.