Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Magpasig Mahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

MLG OPINION NO. 50 S. 2005
20 October 2005

MR. JOSE LEO N. BUENA
Sangguniang Bayan Member
Baaao, Camarines Sur

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter requesting our opinion on matters regarding the Internal Rules of Procedure (IRP) of the Sangguniang Bayan.

After reading your letter, we came up with a summary of issues you would like to be enlightened, to wit:
1. In what form should the IRP be adopted; should it be by way of an ordinance or a resolution? If in an ordinance, is it subject to the review powers of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan?
2. Can the IRP contain provisions which are repugnant to the provisions of the Local Government Code?

With respect to issue no. 1, the determination of whether or not the IRP of a particular sanggunian has to be adopted by way of a resolution or ordinance is relevant because if the IRP is to be adopted by way of an ordinance, you are of the view that the same has to be submitted to the Mayor for his approval per Section 54 of the Local Government Code.

Thus, please allow us first to distinguish between an ordinance and a resolution. It is noted that the product of the sanggunian after deliberating on a particular matter could either be an ordinance or a resolution. In the case of "Municipality of Parañaque vs. YM Realty Corporation" (292 SCRA 678, 20 July 1998), the Supreme Court ruled that "an ordinance is a law but a resolution is merely a declaration of the sentiment or opinion of a lawmaking body on a specific matter. An ordinance possesses a general and permanent character but a resolution is temporary in nature. Additionally, the two are enacted differently - a third reading is not necessary for a resolution unless decided otherwise by a majority of all the sanggunian members".

Coming now to your first issue, it is worthy of note that IRPs may vary from one sanggunian to the other. The new sanggunian may or may not adopt the previous IRP of the former sanggunian. Accordingly, being in the nature of a temporary rule, IRPs are to be adopted in the form of a resolution.

--------------------------------------------------------

The next issue that would now confront us is whether or not all ordinances and resolutions passed by the sanggunian are to be submitted to the Mayor for his approval. In this regard, may we invite your attention to Section 54 (a) of the Local Government Code, which we hereunder quote:

"a) Every ordinance enacted by the sangguniang panlalawigan, sangguniang panlungsod, or sangguniang bayan shall be presented to the provincial governor or city or municipal mayor, as the case may be. If the local chief executive concerned approves the same, he shall affix his signature on each and every page thereof; otherwise, he shall veto it and return the same with his objections to the sanggunian, which may proceed to reconsider the same. The sanggunian concerned may override the veto of the local chief executive by two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members, thereby making the ordinance or resolution effective for all legal intents and purposes."

From the opening sentence of the aforequoted provision, it is clear that all ordinances are to be submitted to the Mayor for his approval. It bears to note that the first sentence did not mention resolution. However, in the last sentence of the same Section 54 (a), it made mention that the "sangguniang concerned may override the veto of the local chief executive by two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members, thereby making the ordinance or resolution effective for all legal intents and purposes". This statement is seemingly confusing considering that in the first sentence, there was no mention of ordinance while in the last sentence, it made mention of an ordinance without any distinction made. This seeming confusion can, however, be immediately resolved by reading Section 55 of the Local Government Code pertaining to the veto power of the local chief executive. Said section gives the Mayor the power to veto any particular item or items of an appropriation ordinance or resolution adopting a Local Development Plan and Public Investment Program.

Accordingly, if said Section 55 vests unto the Mayor the power to veto any item of a resolution adopting a Local Development Plan and Public Investment Program, it follows, by necessary implication, that this kind of resolutions are to be submitted to the Mayor for his approval. This would, therefore, explain why the last sentence of Section 54 (a) made mention of both ordinance and resolution.

In sum, the rule is - all ordinances are to be submitted to the Mayor for his approval. With respect to resolutions, the rule is - all resolutions need not be submitted to the Mayor for his approval, except resolutions adopting Local Development Plans and Public Investment Programs, pursuant to Section 55 (b) of the Local Government Code.

Another issue would again crop up on what particular actions of the sanggunian that are mandated by law to be submitted to the sangguniang panlalawigan for review. The answer is very clear, as