Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
B. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

14 June 2007

MR. ROMULO B. TAVARES
Punong Barangay
Liga Ng Mga Barangay President
Municipality of Pugo, La Union

Dear Punong Barangay Tavares:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our opinion on the appreciation of the term "incumbent".

In your letter, you represented that, at present, you are the President of the Liga ng mga Barangay at the municipal level and as such, you are an ex-officio member of the sangguniang bayan thereat per Section 494 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160). In the recent May 14, 2007 synchronized national and local elections, you ran for the position of Sangguniang Bayan Member in your place and one of your rival candidates for the said position is Guillermo Tavares who used the alias "Ruben" in his certificate of candidacy. In the appreciation of ballots, the votes cast in favor of "R. Tavares" and "Tavares" were not counted in your favor despite the fact that you may consider yourself as an "incumbent" member of the Sangguniang Bayan being an ex-officio member thereof. Hence, your query.

Your query may have been impelled by your knowledge of Section 211(2) of the Omnibus Election Code (BP 881), which provides that:

"Section 211. Rules for the appreciation of ballots.---In the reading and appreciation of ballots, every ballot shall be presumed to be valid unless there is clear and good reason to justify its rejection. The board of election inspectors shall observe the following rules, bearing in mind that the object of the election is to obtain the expression of the voter's will:

(2) If there are two or more candidates with the same full name, first name or surname and one of them is the incumbent, and on the ballot is written only such full name, first name or surname, the vote shall be counted in favor of the incumbent." (Emphasis Supplied)

Based on your representation when we called your office on 12 June 2007 that you already filed an election protest before the Regional Trial Court of Agoo, La Union in accordance with Section 251 of the Omnibus Election Code, we advise you that we are constrained to refrain from interpreting the term "incumbent" as used in the aforementioned provision in view of the basic Constitutional principle of separation of powers.

There being already a pending election protest before the RTC of Agoo, La Union, the controversy is already within the domain of the judicial branch of the government. Hence, this Department, which is under the executive branch, is not at good liberty to render an opinion on the very issue raised before the court as we might be accused of violating the sub-judice rule, which is considered as contumacious act against the court.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,
AUSTERE A. PANADERO
OIC, USLG

Legal/17