Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magpamahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

27 September 2007

MAYOR SONIA TORRES AQUINO
City of Tanauan, Batangas

Dear Mayor Aquino:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on the following queries:

1. Whether or not the City Vice-Mayor is included in the determination of a quorum;

2. Whether or not the City Vice-Mayor is included in the determination of the two-thirds (2/3) vote required in the overriding of the veto by the city mayor?

In your letter, you represented that you vetoed Appropriations Ordinance No. 07-04 entitled, "An Ordinance Repealing Certain Portions of Appropriations Ordinance No. 07-03" passed by the Sanggunian Panlungsod, that City. In an attempt to override your veto, the Sanggunian Panlungsod mustered eight (8) votes out of their total thirteen (13) membership. Such being the case, it is now your contention that your veto has not been overridden for the simple reason that the eight (8) votes, which the Sanggunian Panlungsod has mustered, is definitely below the required two-third (2/3) vote of all of Sanggunian Panlungsod membership. Hence, your queries.

In reply to your first query, we answer in the positive. May we invite your attention to Section 10 of Republic Act No. 9005, the Charter of Tanauan City, which provides and we quote:

"SECTION 10. The Sanggunian Panlungsod. The sangguniang panlungsod, the legislative body of the City, shall be composed of the city vice-mayor as the presiding officer, ten (10) regular sangguniang members, the president of the city chapter of the liga ng mga barangay, the president of the panlungsod na pederasyon ng mga sangguniang kabataan, and the sectoral representatives, as members."

Based on the aforesaid provision, the Sanggunian Panlungsod is composed of ten (10) regular members, the Liga ng mga Barangay President (City Chapter), the SK City Federation President, the City Vice-Mayor as Presiding Officer, and the sectoral representatives.

Under the old Local Government Code (Batas Pambansa Bldg. 337), the Presiding Officer then of the Sanggunian was the Mayor. Thus, there was a dilemma as to whether or not the Presiding Officer is to be included in the determination of quorum in the Sanggunian. This issue was, however, resolved with the advent of the new Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) providing under Section 457 (a) thereof the total composition of the Sanggunian Panlungsod as reproduced under Section (10) of RA 9005, your City Charter. Hence, the city vice-mayor is included in the determination of a quorum in the Sanggunian. This is further bolstered by the recent ruling of the Supreme Court in the case of Gamboa vs. Aguirre (310 SCRA 867), where the said Honorable Court ruled that when the Vice Governor is already acting as Acting Governor, he cannot anymore continue to preside over the session of the Sanggunian as he is expected to perform full-time executive functions. There is a clear delineation, therefore, that a Presiding Officer, as what is now provided for under the new Local Government Code, is part and parcel of the Sanggunian.

Also, based on the aforementioned provision, sectoral representatives are also included in the determination of quorum in the Sanggunian Panlungsod. Let it be noted, however, that sectoral representatives in the local sanggunian are, pursuant to Section 41 (c) of RA 7160 and Section 10 (B) of RA 9260, to be elected "in a manner as may be provided for by law". Meantime however, Congress has yet to enact a law providing for the manner of electing the sectoral representatives at the local sanggunians. Such being the case, sectoral representatives are not, in the meantime, included in the determination of quorum in the local sanggunians.

In view of the foregoing, the Sanggunian Panlungsod is composed of the ten (10) regular members, the Liga ng mga Barangay President (City Chapter) and the SK City Federation President as ex-officio members and the City Vice-Mayor as Presiding Officer. The total membership in that Sanggunian, therefore, is thirteen (13).

Anent your second query, may we invite your attention to Section 15 of your City Chapter, to wit:

"SECTION 15. Approval of Ordinances. - (a) Every ordinance enacted by the sangguniang panlungsod shall be presented to the city mayor. If the city mayor approves the same, he shall affix his signature on each and every page thereof; otherwise, he shall veto it and return the same with his objections to the sanggunian, which may proceed to reconsider the same. The sanggunian may override the veto of the city mayor by two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members, thereby making the ordinance or resolution effective for all legal intents and purposes." (Emphasis Supplied)

Based on the foregoing, a 2/3 vote of all Sanggunian Panlungsod members is required for the overriding of the veto by the City Mayor. Since the City Vice-Mayor, as earlier discussed, is also a member of the Sanggunian Panlungsod and as such, he is included in the determination