REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagamal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. JUAN CLIMACO P. ELAGO II
Sangguniang Panlungsod Member
Zamboanga City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion regarding the
following issues which we quoted herein in toto:

1) What is the correct definition of "POBLACION" and
"CITY AND TOWN DISTRICTS", as stated in Section 5,
as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1310, as applied to a Highly Urbanized City of
Zamboanga with a population of approximately
700,000 and an area of 1.4 million hectares?

2) May the City Government of Zamboanga allow the
establishment of twelve (12) cockpits as provided in
our ordinance? If not, how many is allowed?

3) Can an SP Resolution validly confer a franchise to
operate a cockpit or do you need an ordinance?

The above-mentioned queries are prompted by the passage of
several ordinances, the latest of which is Ordinance No. 223 which
establishes eight (8) districts and four (4) zones in the city proper and
allowed one (1) cockpit in each district and one (1) in each zone.

The legal basis of this ordinance was Section 5 (b) of Presidential
Decree 1310 which amended Section 5 (b) of Presidential Decree No. 449,
otherwise known as the Cockfighting Law of 1974. Said amendatory
section now provides:

"(b) Establishment of Cockpits.- Only one cockpit
shall be allowed in each city or municipality. Provided,
however, that in cities and municipalities with a
population of more than one hundred thousand, two
cockpits may be established maintained and operated
in the Poblacion and one in each city or town district."

In reply to your first query, please be informed that there is no exact
definition of "POBLACION" under the Local Government Code, its
implementing Rules and Regulations and other pertinent laws. However, in
the case of People vs. Moreno (34 OG. 1769), POBLACION has been
defined as the "center of municipality". It was also defined as a center
of a municipality in the Philippines that is usually the barrio that gives the
municipality its name and is the seat of government [Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary].

With regard to the definition of "town district", we are quoting
hereunder the opinion of Department of Justice No. 44 series of 1989 which
was also quoted from the 2nd Indorsement dated June 24, 1984 of Deputy
Minister Primicias Jr., of the Local Government Supervision, Ministry of
Local Government:

"There is no town district under the Local
Government Code. Under Chapter 64, Art. VI of Revised
Administrative Code of 1917, however, Municipality
may be subdivided into administrative district for
purposes of supervision by Municipal Councilor. Said
district may consist of one or more barrios or
barangays."

Under the same opinion, the Department of Justice (DOJ) held that
the Sangguniang Panlungsod and Bayan are vested with the authority to
regulate cockfighting and establishment of cockpits and, hence, may
provide by ordinance the districting.

Prescinding from the said DOJ opinion, while there is no exact
definition of a town or city district, the concerned city or municipality may,
however, be allowed to subdivide the said city into administrative district
for purposes of supervision.

Applying now the provisions of Presidential Decree 1310 it is clear
that the law authorizes the establishment of only two cockpits in the
poblacion and one in each district if the population of the concerned city is.