Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
																												                    L C O N  J O . 28 S . 2 0 0 9  
09 June 2009

MS. ALMA G. MARFIL
MPDC, Municipality of Sibalom
Province of Antique

Dear Ms. Marfil:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on
the following queries, which we quoted in toto:

"(1) In the event that the SB (Sangguniang Bayan) was not
able to override the veto of the mayor of the 20% development fund,
can the LGU re-enact the 2007 development fund and the
corresponding programs reflected therein which were proposed to
be continued for 2008?

(2) In case re-enactment is not possible, will a new Annual
Development/Investment Plan (AIP) for 2008 be submitted to the
SB? Or the MDC can re-submit it (sic) the same as the SB failed to
return the AIP with their (SB) recommendations but made some
insertions and changes in appropriations for programs without
consultation with the MDC?

(3) Can the SB set limitations on the utilization of the
20% development fund, as set forth in Sections II, III, IV of
Appropriation Ordinance No. 2, series 2008. Will these sections be
binding since it was not vetoed by the mayor?"

In reply to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 55
of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), thus:

"Section 55. Veto Power of the Local Chief
Executive. - (a) The local chief executive may veto any
ordinance of the sanggunian panlalawigan, sanggunian
panlungsod, or sanggunian bayan on the ground that it is
ultra vires or prejudicial to the public welfare, stating his
reasons therefor in writing.

(b) The local chief executive, except the punong
barangay, shall have the power to veto any particular item or
items of an appropriations ordinance, an ordinance or
resolution adopting a local development plan and public
investment program, or an ordinance directing the payment
of money or creating liability. In such a case, the veto shall
not affect the item or items which are not objected to. The
vetoed item or items shall not take effect unless the
sangguniang overrides the veto in the manner herein provided;
otherwise, the item or items in the appropriations ordinance
of the previous year corresponding to those vetoed, if any,
shall be deemed reenacted.

(c) The local chief executive may veto an ordinance or
resolution only once. The sanggunian may override the veto
of the local chief executive concerned by two-thirds (2/3) vote
of all its members, thereby making the ordinance effective
even without the approval of the local chief executive
concerned." (Emphasis Supplied)

Paragraph (b) of the aforequoted provision simply advances the rule
that when the Local Chief Executive exercises his line veto power in an
enacted Annual Appropriations Ordinance, those items subject of his line
veto are simply left for naught. However, the Sanggunian concerned may
override the line veto by garnering a 2/3 vote of all its members and when
they had successfully override the same, it is the veto this time which is
left dead thereby making the vetoed items deemed approved by the Local
Chief Executive. If, on the other hand, the veto is not successfully
overridden by the Sanggunian concerned, the item/s in the Annual
Appropriations Ordinance of the previous year corresponding to those
vetoed shall be deemed reenacted, meaning by operation of law. Please
take note that, in your case, the phrase "Annual Appropriations of the
previous year" definitely refers to the duly approved Appropriation
Ordinance for the fiscal year 2007 and not the proposed Annual
Appropriation for fiscal year 2008 submitted to the Local Chief Executive
for approval.