Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

04 June 2008

HON. SANTIAGO R. MARAVILLAS, et al.
Sangguniang Panlungsod Members
Escalante City, Negros Occidental

Dear SP Member Maravillas, et al:

This has reference to your letter seeking the assistance and appropriate action of this Department relative to the attendant circumstances in the failure of that Sangguniian to pass an Appropriations Ordinance for Fiscal Year 2008, said circumstances are hereunder summarized in gist, which you believe are grounds for disciplinary actions provided for under Section 60 of the Local Government Code (RA 7160), viz:

1. The refusal without apparent reason of Hon. Santiago G. Barcelona, Jr., Vice Mayor/Presiding Officer, to call a special session and to tackle the Annual Budget for CY 2008, despite the certification as "urgent" the passing of an appropriations ordinance of Mayor Melecio J. Yap, Jr.

2. The walk-out on different occasions by the Vice Mayor/Presiding Officer, by the Temporary Presiding Officer chosen during sessions, and some members of that Sangguniian from the session hall without leave and worse, while session was on-going.

3. The intentional absences of the Vice Mayor/Presiding Officer and some members identified with the Vice Mayor.

You are of the proposition that the refusal without reason of the Vice Mayor to call a special session and to tackle the Annual Budget for CY 2008 despite that the said measure was certified "urgent" by the City Mayor is not only a gross neglect and/or dereliction of duty but also an abuse of authority as Vice Mayor and Presiding Officer of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Escalante City; that the intentional absences of some members of the Sangguniang identified with the Vice Mayor are detrimental to the interest of public service and a show of lack of respect to the Sangguniang Panlungsod thereby needing disciplinary action.

In the penultimate part of your letter, you requested this Department to issue a ruling for your information and guidance if only to maintain the dignity and respect of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Escalante City.

At the outset, may we remind the members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, and that would include the Vice Mayor as Presiding Officer, of one of their mandated duties under Section 458 of the Local Government Code, which provides that:

"SEC. 458. Powers, Duties, Functions and Compensation.- (a) The sangguniang panlungsod, as the legislative body of the city, shall enact ordinances, approve resolutions and appropriate funds for the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code and in the proper exercise of the corporate powers of the city as provided for under Section 22 of this Code, and shall:

xxx xxx xxx

(i) Approve the annual and supplemental budgets of the city government and appropriate funds for specific programs, projects, services and activities of the city, or for other purposes not contrary to law, in order to promote the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants."

Recognizing the importance of the immediate passage of the Annual Budget of a local government unit, vis-Ã -vis the operation of the local government unit concerned and the delivery of basic services for the public welfare, Section 323 of the same Code further mandates the Sangguniang, to wit:

"SEC. 323. Failure to Enact the Annual Appropriations.- In case the sangguniang concerned