Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagamahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

February 8, 2008

HON. MA. LOURDES C. FERNANDO
Mayor
Marikina City

Dear Mayor Fernando:

This refers to your request for confirmation of the authority of the City of Marikina to enter into a financing arrangement with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) for the purpose of funding its socio-economic and other similar development projects. As represented in your letter, the IFC is a multilateral finance institution created by a treaty to which the Philippines is a party by virtue of Republic Act No. 1604 of 1956.

At the outset, please be informed that in conformity with the prevailing view of this Department, pursuant to a number of opinions issued by the Department of Justice and this Department (e.g. DILG Opinion No. 72-94; DILG Opinion No. 145-03; DOJ Opinion No. 39, s. 1997; DOJ Opinion No. 071 s. 1997 and DOJ Opinion No. 062 s. 1998), Local Government Units cannot directly secure or contract foreign loans based principally on an interpretation of Section 301 in relation to Section 297 of the Local Government Code of 1991.

Nevertheless, taking into consideration the "personality" of your prospective creditor, to our mind, we have to delve into the relationship between an International Law and Municipal Law first before disposing your aforesaid request, thus:

"There are two schools of legal theory - dualist and monist - concerning the relationship between international and municipal law. According to the dualist, international law and municipal law are two completely separate realms. Firstly, the sources of international law are customs grown up among States and treaties concluded by them; the sources of municipal law are custom and precedents grown up within the State's jurisdiction and legislation enacted by the State's lawmaking authority. Secondly, international law regulates relations between States, while municipal law is concerned with individuals in their relations with each other and with the State. Thirdly, international law is not a law above, but between sovereign States; whereas municipal law is a law of a sovereign over individuals subject to its authority. Hence, according to dualist theory, international law can never operate as the law of the land save through municipal custom, judicial decision, or legislative enactment. There can, for example, be no self-executing treaty; enabling legislation is required before the provision of the treaty can be made operative upon persons within the State. In that event, the rules of international law would become operative by adoption of rules of municipal law.

The monist, on the other hand, deny that the subjects of the two systems of law are essentially different and maintain that in both instances it is individual persons who in the ultimate analysis are regulated by the law. Monistic doctrine asserts that international law and municipal law, far from being essentially different, must be regarded as parts of the same juristic conception. According to this doctrine, international law is superior to municipal law; it is international law which determines the jurisdictional limits of the personal and territorial competence of States." (Public International Law, 5th Edition by Salonga and Tuason, pages 10-11)

With the foregoing, applying either of the two theories, it seems to us that the subject treaty should be accorded great weight and respect. It should be treated the same as, if not, more than to our municipal laws or statutes for under the dualist theory the requirement of an enabling legislation before the subject IFC Treaty be made operative (doctrine of transformation) was satisfied with the enactment of RA 1604, and under the monist theory the same is even made superior to our municipal law.

Above premises considered, it is our opinion that borrowings with the IFC, although an international organization, is not within the contemplation of the direct borrowings of LGUs from "foreign sources" proscribed under Section 301 of the LGC for IFC has a charter that forms part of the Philippine law, the latter being a signatory and shareholder thereof, contrary to what was restricted in the DILG Opinion No. 72-94 which involved a loan extended by a private foreign corporation. Noteworthy to mention, likewise, is Article 460 of the Rules and Regulation Implementing the LGC, which enumerated obligations for which debt relief from the National Government is not available, viz:

"Article 460 Debt relief shall not apply to the following:

(a) xxx
(b) foreign loans or indebtedness of LGUs arising from loan contracts or project agreements entered into with foreign countries or international lending institutions and agencies
(c) xxx
(d) xxx
(e) xxx"

which can be deduced that LGUs can incur foreign loans from sovereign or quasi-sovereign lending institution. Otherwise stated, Article 460 of the Rules recognizes a quasi-sovereign multilateral financial entity like IFC as an entity with which LGUs may contract loans and other financing arrangements.

Therefore, we find your request for confirmation of your City's authority to enter into the subject financing agreement with IFC meritorious.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter.

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary