Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. KENGO MIZUNO
General Manager & Sr. Consultant
Normura Research Institute (NRI)
27/F Yuchengco Tower, RCBC Plaza
6819 Ayala cor. Sen. Gil J. Puyat Ave.
Makati City

Dear Mr. Mizuno,

This refers to your letter dated 15 May 2008 where you posited the question: whether o not a local government unit (LGU) can enter into a joint venture with the private sector.

We answer your query in the affirmative.

In general, the power of an LGU to enter into contracts thru its local chief executives provided there is prior sanggunian authorization has long been a settled issue as it is statutorily provided that:

"Sec. 22. Corporate Powers. - (c) Unless otherwise provided in this Code, no contract may be entered into by the local chief executive in behalf of the local government unit without prior authorization by the sanggunian concerned. A legible copy of such contract shall be posted at a conspicuous place in the provincial capitol or the city, municipal or barangay hall."

The same may be said re - the issue as to the extent of contracts an LGU may enter into. While the code did not specify the kinds of contracts that an LGU may enter into the same is understood to mean those contracts that a corporation may legally contract as an LGU by virtue of sections 15 and 22 (6) is statutorily invested with corporate powers. These provisions read thus:

"Sec. 15. Political and Corporate Nature of Local Government Units. - every local government unit created or recognized under this Code is a body politic and corporate endowed with powers to be exercised by it in conformity with law. As such, it shall exercise powers as a political subdivision of the National Government and as a corporate entity representing the inhabitants of its territory."

"Sec. 22. Corporate Powers. - (6) To exercise such other powers as are granted to corporations, subject to the limitations provided in this Code and other laws."

With particular reference to joint venture which is defined in common law as an organization "formed for some temporary purpose" (Gates versus Megargel 266 Fed 811 1920) cited in the Corporation Code Annotated by Jose Campos, we see no real objection why the undertaking known as joint venture should be limited only to People’s and Non-Governmental Organization as seemingly indicated and suggested by Section 35 of the Code.

A reading of Section 35 of the local government code reveals that the said section merely carried out the declared policy in section 34 of the code which is to "promote the establishment and operation of peoples and non-governmental organization to become active partners in the pursuit of local autonomy" by giving them preferential but directory status insofar as joint ventures are concerned. Ergo, being a mere statutory preference of a directory character (as evidenced by the use of the word "may" in the provision of the law), the same should not be taken to mean a real and exclusive limitation or a brick wall which hinders LGU’s to venture with other groups.

Interestingly, enough wikipedia.com and BusinessDictionary.com define Non-governmental organization respectively as:

"A legally constituted organization created by private persons or organization with no participation or representation of any government. In the cases in which NGO’s are founded totally or partially by governments, the NGO maintains its non-governmental status insofar as it excludes government representatives from membership in the organization - from wikipedia.com"

Private sector, voluntary (and usually non-profit and non-secretarian) organization that contributes to or participant in, cooperation projects, education, training or other humanitarian, progressive, or watchdog activities. Some of them are accredited by the U.P., and some collect donations for distribution among disadvantaged or distress people. - from businessdictionary.com"

In as much as there is not a substantial distinction between the two concepts as defined above, we submit that an LGU can and may validly enter into a joint venture with the private sector.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,
AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary for Local Government