REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapag mahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

16 June 2008

ATTY. ROGELIO U. MARASIGAN
ATTY. PIO KENNETH I. DASAL
Law Department
City Hall, Makati City

Gentlemen:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking our legal opinion on
whether your Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) City Federation President can sign
a Contract of Service in behalf of the SK City Federation considering that she
is still a minor.

In reply thereto, may we respectfully point out that "capacity to
act" has been defined under Article 37 of the New Civil Code as the power
to do acts with legal effect. When RA 6809 has lowered the age of majority
in the Philippines from twenty-one (21) to eighteen (18) years old, those who
reached the age of 18 years are now given the full capacity to act.

Corollarily, under Article 38 of the same Code, it is provided that
"minority" is a mere restriction on one’s capacity to act. It being a
restriction, it is erroneous to say that a minor has no capacity to act. Hence,
a minor has a capacity to act but the same is restricted. For instance, under
the Civil Code of the Philippines, a minor is allowed to enter into a contract
provided that there is parental consent.

As a general rule, therefore, minors have restricted capacity to act.
The case, however, is different with respect to the capacity to act by SK
officials with respect to certain matters.

In this regard, may we note that under Sections 426 and 430 of the
Local Government Code, the Sangguniang Kabataan as a collegial body,
and the SK Chairmen, respectively, were conferred by law with certain
powers, duties and functions. These provisions contained the express grant
of such powers and the mandate to perform certain duties and functions. At
this point, it is not even amiss to point out that the SK Chairmen and
officials may be held liable and accountable for their failure to perform
these duties, functions and powers. The Local Government Code,
particularly Section 436 thereof, likewise provided for the creation of the SK
federations and mandated them to exercise certain powers in the federation
in accordance with the Constitution and By Laws of the SK and the Local
Government Code.

Along this line, it becomes imperative for us to discuss the doctrine of
"necessary implication". This doctrine is explained, thus:

"No statute can be enacted that can provide all the
details involved in its application. There is always an
omission that may not meet a particular situation. What is
thought, at the time of enactment, to be an all-embracing
legislation may be inadequate to provide for the unfolding of


the events of the future. So-called gaps in the law develop as the
law is enforced. One of the rules of statutory construction
used to fill in the gap is the doctrine of necessary
implication. The doctrine states that what is implied in a
statute is as much a part thereof as that which is expressed.
Every statute is understood, by implication, to contain all
such provisions as may be necessary to effectuate its object
and purpose, or to make effective rights, powers, privileges
or jurisdiction which it grants, including all such collateral
and subsidiary consequences as may be fairly and logically
inferred from its terms. Ex necessitate legis. And every
statutory grant of power, right or privilege is deemed to
include all incidental power, right or privilege. This is so
because the greater includes the lesser, expressed in the
maxim, in co plus sit, simper tiniest et minus." (Chua vs. Civil
Service Commission, G.R. No. 88979, 07 February 1982, as
cited in the case of Atienza vs. Villarosa, G.R. No. 161081, 10
May 2005).

By applying the aforesaid doctrine, it can be certainly said that the
express conferment of such powers, duties and functions to the SK
Chairmen and officials would also include the implied conferment of the
capacity to act unto the SK officials, thus, empowering them to do certain