Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Cono mini um II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

July 2, 2007

MANUEL P. SOLOMON
Barangay Chairman
Barangay Tunasan
Muntinlupa City

Dear Barangay Chairman Solomon:

This pertains to your letter query on the matter of permanent vacancy
in the Office of the Liga ng mga Barangay President, City Chapter.

As represented, the Liga ng mga Barangay President City Chapter ran
and won as Vic. Mayor in that city in the last May 14, 2007 national and
local elections. He will assume office as City Vice Mayor on July 1, 2007
leaving the position of the Liga ng mga Barangay President vacant. Due to
that fact, the Mayor of Muntinlupa is calling for an election for the new set of
Liga officers. Hence, you seek our opinion on the matter.

In reply thereto, please be informed that the operations and affairs of
the Association of Liga ng mga Barangay are governed by their own
Constitution and By Laws. The manner of election, term and tenure of office
and vacancies of Liga Federation officials are likewise governed by the same
Constitution and By Laws. Thus, Section 2, Article XII of the Constitution
and By-Laws of the Liga ng mga Barangay sa Pilipinas reads:

"Section 2. Vacancies and Succession. In case of a
permanent vacancy in the office of the President due to refusal
to assume office, failure to qualify, death or removal from
office, voluntary resignation or incapacity to discharge functions
of his/her office, the Executive Vice-President in the case of
the National Liga or the Vice-President, in the case of the local
Liga at all levels, shall assume the office for the unexpired term
of the former. Succession shall take effect only after
confirmation of the National Liga Executive. The Vice-President
who assumed the vacant position shall represent the Liga
chapter in the sanggunian concerned.

xxx xxx xxx"

In applying the aforementioned provision, once the Liga City Chapter
President will assume his office as City Vice-Mayor on noon of June 30,
2007, such assumption would result to the forfeiture of his Punong
Barangay position and consequently will divest him of his Liga Presidency
since he can no longer represent the barangay in the Liga. Said event would
render the Liga Presidency position as vacant thereby calling for the
application of Section 2. Thus, the Liga Vice-President shall assume the
office for the unexpired term pursuant to Section 2, Article XII of the
Constitution and By-Laws of the Liga ng mga Barangay sa Pilipinas.

We hope we have enlightened you on this matter.

Very truly yours,

By Authority of the Secretary:

PASCUAL V. VERON CRUZ, JR.
head Executive Assistant

cc: DIRECTOR RODOLFO S. PIERAREN
DILG, NCR
LMP Bldg., Ermin Garcia Street
Cubao, Quezon City
Legald28/Mert