Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

28 May 2008

ATTY. ROSELLER A. VIRAY
Poblacion West, Asingan
2439 Pangasinan

Dear Atty. Viray:

This has reference to your letter dated 05 May 2008 requesting this Department to investigate and make appropriate move to declare the Office of the Vice-Mayor in Asingan, Pangasinan as vacant and thereafter to appoint the immediate replacement thereof. Your letter is perhaps a response to this Department's Opinion No. 19, series of 2008, dated 09 April 2008 addressed to Ms. Marivic Q. Guerrero, DILG-LGOO V, that Municipality, where, in gist, we opined that notwithstanding Vice-Mayor Mila P. Antonio's being accused in several cases of Estafa, this condition does not automatically deprive her of her entitlement to the privileges of her office (e.g. leave privileges). We reasoned out therein that until and unless she is proven guilty thereof beyond reasonable doubt, via a conviction by final judgment, she continues to enjoy the presumption of innocence, and until and unless she is permanently separated from office for any of the reasons sanctioned by law, she remains to be the Vice-Mayor thereat.

At the outset, may we respectfully acknowledge the receipt of the following documents attached to your letter:

(a) Three (3) copies of Information for three (3) counts of Estafa under 315 2 (a) in relation to Presidential Decree 1689 against Vice-Mayor Antonio as well as their corresponding Warrant for her Arrest;

(b) A copy of an Information for Refusal to Discharge Elective Office against her;
(c) A copy of a Joint Affidavit-Complaint for an Administrative Case against Vice-Mayor Antonio filed before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Pangasinan.

In reply to your requests, please be informed that we cannot give due course thereto. This Department is bereft of any authority to declare the position of Vice-Mayor Mila P. Antonio in Asingan, Pangasinan (or any elective position in general), as permanently vacant nor appoint her immediate replacement.

This Department has been consistent in its stand that until such time when Vice-Mayor Antonio of Asingan, Pangasinan is proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt via a conviction by final judgment for the crime of three (3) counts of Estafa and Failure to Assume Office which, according to you, are now pending before the courts of law in that Province, she is presumed innocent for such crime. And until such time when she is removed from office by order of the proper court for any of the grounds (e.g. excessive absences) set forth under Section 60 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), as implemented by Article 124 of its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), she remains to be the Vice-Mayor of Asingan.

Along this line, may we respectfully stress that removal from office is not effected once any of the grounds set forth under Section 60 of the Code, as implemented by Article 124 of its IRR, arises so that when an elective official has incurred and continuously incurring physical absence up to the point that her absence has already exceeded that allowable under pertinent law, rules and regulations, she is deemed removed from office. This is an incorrect interpretation. Section 61 of the Code mandates that a verified administrative complaint must still be filed before the proper forum and that hearings must be conducted in accordance with pertinent laws, rules and regulations and the requirements of due process. The reason being that the act that may sanction her removal from office, that is, her excessive absences, no matter how apparent it is, is a factual issue which is yet to be determined by the proper forum. And if the evidence so submitted warrants the removal of the elective official, a decision ordering the same must be issued by the proper court and it is only then that such elective official is removed from office.

As to the proper forum, let it be noted that the Office of the Ombudsman and the local sanggungan concerned (in your case, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan) have concurrent jurisdiction over administrative cases filed against erring elective official pursuant to