Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 20, S. 2005
10 March 2005

MR. JOEL DELA CRUZ
Barangay Kagawad
No. 153-C, A. Luna Street
Barangay Malinao, Pasig City

Dear Mr. Dela Cruz:

This refers to your letter-query in connection with the predicament confronting the remaining four (4) members of the Sangguniang Barangay of Malinao, Pasig City, in view of the preventive suspension of its five (5) other members. In particular, you asked:

1. "Can four (4) remaining elected barangay officials legally function or discharge their official duties and power after the suspension for ninety (90) days of five (5) other elected barangay officials, including the Punong Barangay?"

2. If they can, what will be the required number among the remaining four (4) officials to constitute a quorum?"

We shall answer your queries jointly. Thus:

It is an elementary principle that in order for your sangguniang to transact official business, there should be the presence, in a particular session, of at least a majority of all the members, who have been elected and qualified, in order to constitute a quorum. This is what quorum means, per Section 53 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160). Ergo, in a sangguniang barangay composed of the Punong Barangay, as Presiding Officer, seven (7) regular members and the SK Chairman as Ex-Officio Member, bringing the total composition to nine (9) members, there should be at least five (5) members present to constitute a quorum.

However, in view of the legal impossibility to obtain this requirement insofar as your sangguniang barangay is concerned vis-Ã -vis the preventive suspension of your five (5) other colleagues, we are of the view that the remaining four (4) members shall be the basis in determining your sangguniang's quorum.

The above-stated view is based on the immortal Decision of the Supreme Court in the case of "Avelino vs. Cuenco" (83 Phil. 17), whereby the Highest Tribunal excluded a Member of the Senate in the determination of quorum for that the said Senator was in the United States and, therefore, outside the coercive jurisdiction of the Senate (cited in DILG Opinion No. 09, s. 2005).

Applying the said case law to the situation obtaining in your sangguniang barangay, we are of the view that the preventive suspension order issued by the RTC, has by itself, excluded the suspended officials from the determination of the quorum as the sangguniang barangay's coercive jurisdiction 'to compel' the attendance of these sangguniang barangay members had been likewise temporarily suspended since they are, in the meantime, legally prevented from discharging the functions of their offices.

Such being the case, the preventive suspension of the five (5) other members of your sangguniang effectively reduced the number for the time being, of the quorum of that sangguniang barangay necessary for it to transact business.

Ergo, the four (4) remaining and still qualified members of the sangguniang shall be the basis in determining the quorum of the Sangguniang Barangay of Malinao, which would thereby mean that at least three (3) of the four (4) members should be present in a session to constitute the quorum to officially transact business.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGELITO T. REYES
Secretary

Department of the Philippines
Department of the INTERIOR
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

In RE: V. G. S. S.
SILG-05-004589

Legal:87/La

cc: Assistant Secretary Serafin M. Benaldo
DILG-National Capital Region
LMP Bldg., Ermin Garcia Street
Cubao, Quezon City