REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES  
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
A. Francisco Golic, Condominun 
E. Bato Cat Magpumalh S. 
Diliman, Quezon City  

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY  

OPINION NO. 19  
S. 2005  
March 10, 2005  

VICE-MAYOR PERFECTO D. MARRERO  
Municipality of Calanasan  
Province of Apayao  

Dear Sir:  

This pertains to your letter requesting for a legal opinion concerning the  
proper treatment of absences of a member of the Sangguniang Bayan in relation  
to his entitlement to salary and its consequent administrative sanctions.  

You stated that SB Member Denvert K. Andres has not been attending  
sessions. His failure to attend sessions was brought about by his being "at large"  
by reason of a warrant issued for his arrest in connection with a criminal case  
filed against him. However, SB Member Andres has filed on September 1, 2004  
a one (1) month leave of absence.  

Your queries:  

"May we solicit your opinion whether he can claim his salary  
considering that he is a new member of the Sangguniang Bayan  
and therefore has no (leave) earned credits yet?  

Further, the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the  
Local Government Code of 1991 penalizes the non-attendance of  
SB Members for four (4) consecutive sessions. They may be  
censured, reprimanded or excluded from the session, suspended  
for sixty (60) days or expelled. This provision is adopted by the  
Sangguniang in its Internal Rules of Procedures. Considering  
therefore, the consecutive non-attendance of the above named  
official for more than four consecutive sessions of the body and that  
he has pending case filed in court, what particular sanction can we  
impose upon him at this level and who shall administer or issue the  
sanction?"  

Please be informed that SB Member Andres cannot claim his salary for  
reason of the "no work no pay" policy. For a public officer or employee to be  
entitled to the salary attached to the office, two (2) requisites must concur,  
namely: 1) Title to the office either by election or appointment; and 2) actual  
services rendered. In the case of SB member Andres, since he has not rendered  
actual services, he is not entitled to be paid for the period he did not work. He  
cannot also receive any sum of money because he has no earned/accrued leave  
credits.  

For his continuous non-attendance in Sangguniang sessions, SB Member  
Andres could be sanctioned administratively either through the Internal  
Disciplinary mechanism of the Sangguniang Bayan in accordance with its  
Internal Rules of Procedure pursuant to Section 50(b)(5) or through a proper  
administrative complaint filed before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan pursuant to  
Section 61(b) of the Local Government Code and Article 125(b) of the  
Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code.  

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.  

Very truly yours,  

ANGEL T. REYES  
Secretary  

cc: DIRECTOR EVERDINA E. DOCTOR  
DILG - CAR  
Barangay Center, Baguio City  

Legal:68/Merle