REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapag-mahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG OPINION NO. 34 S. 2007
20 April 2007

DIRECTOR CARLOS T. DERECHO
DILG-CARAGA Administrative Region
Matimco Bldg., Km. 4, Libertad
Butuan City

Dear Director Derecho:

This refers to your request for legal opinion relative to the commencement
of the corporate existence of the Province of Dinagat Islands, a newly created
province by virtue of RA 9355 (An Act Creating the Province of Dinagat Islands).

Sections 49, 50 and 51 of RA 9355 provide that:

"SEC. 49. Commencement of Corporate Existence.- The
Province of Dinagat Islands shall commence its corporate
existence upon the election and qualification of the governor, vice
governor and majority of the members of the sangguniang
panlalawigan."

"SEC. 50. Officials of the Province of Dinagat Islands.- (A)
The first set of elective officials of the Province of Dinagat Islands
shall be elected in the next local elections following the effectivity
of this Act.

The President of the Philippines shall appoint an interim
governor, vice governor and members of the sangguniang
panlalawigan, who shall serve only until a new set of provincial
officials have been elected and qualified."

"SEC. 51. Organization of the Provincial Government.- All
provincial appointive positions in the Province of Dinagat Islands
as enumerated in Section 8 hereof shall be filled within sixty (60)
days after the commencement of corporate existence of the
province, as provided for in Section 49 hereof. This shall be done
without prejudice to the officials and employees of the present
Province of Surigao del Norte, who may wish to serve in the
Province of Dinagat Islands."

With the abovequoted provisions of RA 9355, you now wish to be
enlightened on whether or not the corporate existence of the province will
commence: (a) upon the appointment by the President of the Philippines of the
interim governor, vice governor and members of the sangguniang panlalawigan;
or (b) upon the election and qualification of the governor and majority of the
members of the sangguniang panlalawigan.

Before replying to your query, may we quote Section 14 of the Local
Government, which is the general law with respect to local governments, to wit:

"SEC. 14. Beginning of Corporate Existence.- When a new
local government unit is created, its corporate existence shall
commence upon the election and qualification of its chief executive
and a majority of the members of its sangguniang, unless some other
time is fixed thereby by the law or ordinance creating it."

It, therefore, becomes imperative for us to discuss the rules of statutory
construction as applied to statutes in relation to other statutes. One of these rules
is the in pari materia rule. Statutes or laws in pari materia refer to "those which
are related to the same person or thing, or to the same class of persons or things,
or which have a common purpose or object" (2 Sutherland, Stat. Const., 3rd ed.,
p. 533). "All laws are presumed to have been enacted by the legislature with full
knowledge of the existing condition of the law and with reference to it. They are,
therefore, to be construed in connection with and in harmony with the existing
law and as a part of a general and uniform jurisprudence" (Storis vs. Heck, 190
So. 86). "The in pari materia rule of construction decrees that in the
construction of a particular statute, or in the interpretation of its provisions, all
statutes relating to the same general purpose should be read in connection with
it. Statutes in pari materia should be constructed as if they constituted one law,
or one system enacted in the same spirit in furtherance of the same policy" (82
C.J.S., pp. 803-806). "Hence, the legislative intent is not to be derived from the
literal meaning of the words of a statute but from a view of the whole system of
which it is a part" (Smith vs. Higginbottom, 48 A. 2nd, p. 754). "Therefore, the
purpose of the in pari materia rule of construction is to carry out the full
legislative intent by giving effect to all laws and provisions bearing on the same.