Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

14 January 2009

MS. MARY ELEANOR A. MENDOZA
Vice-President for Business Development
Eton Properties Philippines, Inc.
12/F Allied Bank Center
6754 Ayala Avenue cor. Legaspi St.
Makati City

Dear Ms. Mendoza:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking for our legal opinion
on the scope of the review power of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of
Laguna over resolutions passed by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of the
City of Sta. Rosa, a component city of that province.

Per your letter, your company is developing a real estate project to
be known as the "South Lake Village at Eton City" located in Barangay
Malitlit, City of Sta. Rosa, Province of Laguna. You said that on 16 June
2008, the City of Sta. Rosa issued a Development Permit in your company’s
favor pursuant to Kapasiyahan No. 156-2008, dated 16 June 2008 of the
Sangguniang Panlungsod, that city. In fact, you have attached to your
letter a copy of the Development Permit signed by City Mayor Arlene
Arcillas-Nazareno.

Surprisingly thereafter, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan has started to
conduct hearings concerning the project and your company, as the
developer of the project, was required to attend said hearings allegedly for
purposes of review, confirmation and approval by that August Body of the
said City Resolution. Meanwhile, according to you, the Sangguniang
Panlungsod maintains a legal position that its City Resolution approving
your company’s Development Permit is not anymore subject to review,
confirmation and approval by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan so that up to
the date of your letter, the former has not officially transmitted to the latter
the subject City Resolution and its attached documents.

Thus, you are now seeking for our legal opinion on this issue:
whether or not a resolution issued by a Sangguniang Panlungsod approving the
issuance of a development permit for a residential/commercial subdivision is
subject to review by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan.

In relation thereto, on 28 November 2008, you learned about the
passage of Resolution No. 429, series of 2008 by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan, entitled "Resolution Urging the Honorable Governor Teresita S.
Lazaro to Issue Cease and Desist Order to the Continuing Development of
Eton City at the City of Sta. Rosa, Laguna". According to you, the aforesaid
Sangguniang Panlalawigan resolution was passed allegedly because the
City Resolution approving your company’s Development Permit as well as
the Development Permit itself for the project has not been reviewed,
additional query for our resolution: whether or not the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan or the Provincial Governor has the authority to issue a cease and
desist order (CDO) against your company vis-a-vis your intended real estate
project.

In reply to your main query, may we invite your attention to Section
56 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), to wit:

"SECTION 56. Review of Component City and
Municipal Ordinances or Resolutions by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan.--(a) Within three (3) days after approval,
the secretary to the sangguniang panlungsod or
sangguniang bayan shall forward to the sangguniang
panlalawigan for review, copies of approved ordinances
and the resolutions approving the local development
plans and public investment programs formulated by the
local development councils."

It is clear from the foregoing that the power of review conferred unto
the Sangguniang Panlalawigan extends only to approved city ordinances
and resolutions approving the local development plans and public
investment programs formulated by the local development councils. Stated
differently, all approved ordinances of the component cities are mandated
by the Local Government Code to be forwarded to the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan for review. On the other hand, resolutions are not anymore
to be forwarded to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for review except those
resolutions approving and adopting the local development plans and
public investment programs of component cities which, by express
mandate of Section 56 (a) of the Local Government Code, are to be
submitted to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan for review. The rationale
behind the exception given to resolutions approving and adopting the local
development plans and public investment programs is that they pertain to
matter with permanence and thus, in the nature of an Ordinance.

At this juncture, it is imperative to distinguish an ordinance from a
resolution, which are both products of our local legislative bodies such as
the local sanggunians. "A municipal ordinance is different from a
resolution. An ordinance is a law, but a resolution is merely a
declaration of the sentiment or opinion of a lawmaking body on
a specific matter. An ordinance possesses a general and permanent
character, but a resolution is temporary in nature. Additionally, the
two are enacted differently - a third reading is necessary for an
ordinance, but not for a resolution, unless decided otherwise by a