Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

July 02, 2007

MR. ARNULFO A. SABENANO
Secretary to the Sanggunian Bayan
Pakil, Laguna

Dear Hon. Sabeñano:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our opinion on the manner of filling up vacancies in your Sanggunian Bayan and the applicability of Section 45 (b) of the Local Government Code of 1991.

In your letter, you represented that Reymar M. Sabeñano has previously tendered his resignation as Member of the Sanggunian Bayan in that municipality. In accordance with Section 45 (b) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), the political party where SB Member Sabeñano belongs endorsed Mr. Vicente P. Macabasco as his replacement, who was then appointed by the Governor of Laguna to the vacant position in the Sanggunian Bayan. Thereafter, SB Member Macabasco also tendered his resignation to the same position. Thus, you are now in a quandary as to whether the manner of replacement for SB Member Macabasco shall still be in accordance with Section 45 (b) of the Local Government Code, whereby the political party of SB Members Macabasco and Sabeñano will nominate the appointee who will replace this time SB Member Macabasco.

In reply thereto, we answer in the affirmative. Section 45 (b) of the Local Government Code is still the law applicable. Said provision states and we quote:

"SEC. 45. Permanent Vacancies in the Sanggunian. xxx (b) Except for the sanggunian barangay, only the nominee of the political party under which the sanggunian member concerned had been elected and whose elevation to the position next higher in rank created the last vacancy in the sanggunian shall be appointed in the manner hereinabove provided. The appointee shall come from the same political party as that of the sanggunian member who caused the vacancy and shall serve the unexpired term of the vacant office. In the appointment herein mentioned, a nomination and a certificate of membership of the appointee from the highest official of the political party concerned are conditions sine qua non, and any appointment without such nomination and certification shall be null and void ab initio and shall be a ground for administrative action against the responsible therefor."

Based on the aforequoted provision, it bears to note that the appointee must come from the same political party under which the sanggunian member who caused the vacancy was elected. Hence, in order to maintain the political representation in the sanggunian as willed by the people (Navarro vs. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 141307, 28 March 2001), it should still be the political party of SB Member Sabeñano which should issue the party nomination notwithstanding that in the meantime, the appointee would be replacing SB Member Macabasco, the earlier replacement of SB Member Sabeñano.

Moreover, Section 45 as aforequoted does not contain a limitation to its application should the earlier replacement would in turn resign. Hence, when SB Member Macabasco thereafter resigned, thereby causing a permanent vacancy in the Sanggunian Bayan, the appointee for his replacement shall properly come from his political party, the same political party where SB Member Sabeñano previously belonged. Nowhere can we find the aforequoted provision limiting the number of times the concerned political party may nominate. Hence, we cannot see any reason to depart from applying Section 45 (b) of the Local Government Code to your case.

We hope we have enlightened you on this matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
OIC-OUSLG

cc.: DIR. ROBERTO C. ABEJERO
DILG, Region IV-A
FTI Complex, Taguig City

Legal:28/Merie