REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg., EDSA
Corner Magpahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

March 25, 2009

HON. JESUS RADMAR T. RESENTE
Punong Barangay
Brgy. Congress 173, Congress Village
North Caloocan City

Dear Punong Brgy. Resente:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the following queries, which we quoted in toto:

"1. Whether or not the temporary barangay secretary (Mrs. Rosalie V. Rojas) can discharge the duties and functions of her office, specially signing the Resolutions for attachments of the Supplemental Budget and other documents while a case is pending with the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Caloocan City regarding the power to appoint and to terminate barangay officials, filed against the Punong Barangay.

2. Whether or not the Sangguniang Barangay can validly appoint a temporary barangay secretary from among the Sangguniang Barangay members during the conduct of sessions, notwithstanding the fact that a Barangay Secretary had been appointed, before the case had been filed before the Sangguniang Panglungsod in the exigency of public service because the former secretary had been terminated due to absences without official leave.

3. Whether or not the appointed Temporary Barangay Secretary (MRS. ROSALIE V. ROJAS), acting and performing the duties and functions of her position for almost four (4) months now, pending concurrence by the Sangguniang Barangay and while a case is pending against the Punong Barangay on issues of appointment and termination of the secretary can validly receive her allowance/remuneration."

Before dwelling on your queries, may we first invite your attention to the following provisions of the Local Government Code and DILG Memorandum Circular No. 2002-150 dated September 18, 2002, to wit:

Section 394 of the Local Government Code provides that:

"Section 394. BARANGAY SECRETARY:
APPOINTMENT QUALIFICATIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES
(a) The barangay secretary shall be appointed by the punong
barangay with the concurrence of the majority of all the
sangguniang barangay members. The appointment of the
barangay secretary shall not be subject to attestation by the Civil
Service Commission.

xxx xxx xxx

Article II. Sections 4 and 5 of DILG Memorandum
Circular No. 2002-150 also provides that:

"Section 4. Pending Compliance with the condition of
concurrence, the appointee, in the exigency of public service,
shall be allowed to discharge and perform the powers, duties and
responsibilities pertaining to the office and they shall be
considered to be holding a temporary appointment."

"Section 5. Pursuant to Section 5 of RA 6713, otherwise
known as the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public
Officials and Employees" the Sangguniang Barangay shall act on
the appointment within fifteen (15) working days from receipt of
the appointment as submitted by the punong barangay."

In the case of Alquizola vs. Ocol (313 SCRA 293), the Supreme Court
ruled that "the power to appoint is to be exercised conjointly by the
Punong Barangay and a majority of all the members of the sangguniang
barangay." Such being the case, the correlative duty of the members of
the Sangguniang Barangay being referred to would now be the required
concurrence, and pending concurrence, being the final phase of the
appointment, shall make the appointment temporary (Sec. 4, DILG MC
NO. 2002-150).

Applying the above-cited provisions of the Local Government
Code, DILG Memorandum Circular and the Supreme Court ruling to your
first and last queries, please be informed that the appointed Secretary
(MRS. ROSALIE V. ROJAS) may assume her duties and functions, in an
action capacity pending concurrence by the majority members of the
Sangguniang Barangay. However, once the Sangguniang Barangay
expresses officially its non-concurrence to the appointment, the barangay
secretary shall not be anymore allowed to perform her duties.

May it be emphasized, however, that while the power to concur is
given to the Sangguniang Barangay, said body is not vested with so much
plenary discretionary powers. The power to concur is intended for the
sangguniang to determine whether or not the appointee of the Punong
Barangay possesses all the qualifications prescribed for Barangay
Secretary under Section 394 of the Local Government Code and such
other qualifications provided for by existing laws, such as relative within
the 4th civil degree; previously removed from government service for
cause; and other grounds. If the appointee, therefore possesses all the
qualifications provided for by law, then the Sangguniang Barangay has
no other far-reaching powers except to issue the concurrence.
Exceeding that limitation, the Sangguniang Barangay would already be in
effect exercising the appointing authority and prerogatives of a Punong