Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR LEGAL
ADMINISTRATIVE AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

25 June 2009

PUNONG BARANGAY LORENZO P. RAÃ‘A
Barangay Mambaya-an, Balingsag
Misamis Oriental

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your request for legal opinion vis-Ã -vis successive 
absences during the regular sessions of the Sangguniang Barangay Members 
thereat, to wit:

1. Barangay Kagawad committed two (2) successive absences of 
the regular session of the Sangguniang Barangay without 
justifiable cause.

2. Barangay Kagawad committed five (5) successive absences of 
the regular session of the Sangguniang Barangay without 
justifiable cause.

It could be recalled that in the Provincial Congress of the Liga ng mga 
Barangay, Misamis Oriental Chapter, held at Dynasty Hotel, Cagayan de Oro 
City, of which undersigned was one of the resource speakers, you raised the 
question on whether or not Sangguniang Barangay Members who incurred 
absences during regular sessions can be deprived of their honorarium.

To your said query, the undersigned answered affirmatively, citing the 
COA Rules and the Government Accounting and Auditing Manual, which provide 
that honorarium are paid for services actually rendered. Considering, therefore, 
that under Section 393 of the Local Government Code and under Local Budget 
Circular No. 63 dated 22 October 1996, barangay officials are compensated by 
way of honoraria, then any Member of the Sangguniang Barangay who incurred 
absences during regular sessions of the Sangguniang Barangay may be 
deprived of the honorarium there being no services actually rendered. To bolster 
this position, attached herewith is Opinion No. 55, s. 2004, which deals on the 
same subject matter.

In your present letter, however, you raised that the opinion of the 
undersigned given during the Provincial Congress contradicted that of the the 
opinions both from the DILG Provincial Director and the DILG Municipal Officer of 
Balingsag, Misamis Oriental.

To reconcile, as according to you, the conflicting opinions, undersigned 
asked you to fax a copy of your letter-query addressed to the Provincial DILG of 
Misamis Oriental and the reply thereto by the latter.

A reading of your query to our Provincial Office would reveal that you 
sought legal opinion on whether or not an absentee Sangguniang Barangay 
Member can be dropped from the payroll, to which the DILG Provincial Office 
replied in the negative, stating that the absences of a Sangguniang Barangay 
Member would not result to a permanent vacancy and, therefore, said 
Sangguniang Barangay Member cannot be summarily dropped from the payroll 
of the barangay.

With the foregoing presentation, it is clear that there is no conflict between 
the undersigned's opinion given during the Liga ng mga Barangay Congress and 
the opinion issued by the DILG Provincial Office. The undersigned simply 
responded to your question as to whether or not a Sangguniang Barangay 
Member who incurred absences can be deprived of his honorarium. There was 
no issue raised as to dropping from the payroll. Undersigned concurs with the 
opinion of the DILG Provincial Office that the absentee Sangguniang Barangay 
Member cannot be dropped from the payroll as clearly, this would connote 
removal from office without due process. The proper procedure in legally 
depriving the Sangguniang Barangay Member who incurred absences would 
have been to still include him in the barangay payroll but with no corresponding 
amount for his honorarium there being no services actually rendered as basis 
therefor.

With respect to the Sangguniang Barangay Member who incurred five (5) 
consecutive absences without justifiable cause, your attention is invited to Article 
124 (a) (6) of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government 
Code, which provides that a Sangguniang Barangay Member who incurred 
authorized absences for four (4) consecutive sessions of the Sangguniang may 
be subjected to disciplinary action, in which case, a verified complaint may be 
filed before the Sangguniang Bayan of the municipality where the barangay 
belongs pursuant to Section 61 (a) of the Local Government Code.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

G. J. EMETERIO S. MORENO, JR.
Assistant Secretary

OASLAHRD:43/La
cc: The Regional Director
DILG Regional Office No. 10
Cagayan de Oro City
Director Ponciano D. Caberte
DILG Provincial Field Office
Provincial Capitol Building
Cagayan de Oro City
The Municipal Local Government Operations Officer
DILG Municipal Field Office
Balingsag, Misamis Oriental