Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

GIL 6 OPINION NO. 10  $ 200.9
25 February 2009

MR. NELSON S. LAZARTE
Sangguniang Bayan Secretary
Barotac Nuevo, Iloilo

Dear Mr. Lazarte:

This pertains to your query on the proper application of the Internal Rules
of Procedure (IRP) of that Sangguniang.

In particular, you asked as to whether or not an indefinite recess declared
by the Vice Mayor as Presiding Officer during its regular session is allowed
considering that there were still pending motions on the floor. Emphatically, you
further inquired if whether or not such declaration is within the power of the Vice
Mayor to do.

Before answering your query, allow us first to enumerate, in the order of
hierarchy, the sources of parliamentary rules, to wit: (1) Constitution; (2) Law
(Sections 48-59 of the Local Government Code); (3) Judicial Decisions of the
Supreme Court; (4) Internal Rules of Procedure; (5) Parliamentary Practice; (6)
Parliamentary Authors; and (7) Customs and Usage.

A closer scrutiny of the first three (3) sources of parliamentary rules would
reveal that nothing is contained therein with respect to declaration of recess of
Sangguniang sessions. Such being the case, applying the rule of hierarchy of the
sources of parliamentary rules, the next lower source to be examined is the IRP
of that Sangguniang.

Your query, therefore, as to whether or not an indefinite recess is allowed
is best answered by your IRP, and as by whom, how and when to declare it, the
same can be answered also by your IRP. In the absence of any provision in your
IRP pertaining to the rule of declaration of recess, then your next source of
answer to your query would be parliamentary practice, which is the next in line in
the hierarchy of sources of parliamentary procedure.

Under parliamentary practice, the roll-call in order to determine the
presence or absence of a quorum is done at the opening of the session. If the
existence of a quorum is established, the Sangguniang, as a collective body, may
now proceed with the transaction of its official business. In parliamentary
practice, a recess is allowed, which means a suspension of business or
procedure for a comparatively short time. The recess, however, can be declared
only for a particular regular or special session and not on a day-to-day recess as
this would mean in reality an adjournment.

The issue now that can be collaterally raised is whether or not those
members who returned in the session hall after the period of recess can proceed
with the conduct of the session even if the others who were originally present
during the roll-call did not anymore return. We believe that this question should
be answered in the affirmative. The resumption of the session after the recess is
still part of that particular session and, therefore, is covered by the original
determination of a quorum at the start of the session. However, while the
remaining members can resume and continue the session, the approval of
measures thereafter would still require the majority vote of the members present
during the roll-call at the start of the session and not the majority of those
remaining members who returned after the recess.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

OASLARD:43/La
cc: Director Evelyn A. Trompeta
DILG Regional Office No. 06
Fort San Pedro, Iloilo City