Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagkalahat St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

June 29, 2006

MR. CALIXTO R. CATAQUIZ
CRC Realty Development Corporation
63 Mabini Street, San Pedro
Laguna

Dear Mr. Cataquiz:

This has reference to your earlier letter in connection with your plan
to acquire a parcel of property owned by the City of Santa Rosa, Laguna that
you, in turn, are planning to develop into a mass housing project pursuant
to the housing program of the government. You specifically inquired on
whether or not the City of Santa Rosa is allowed to accept a bank guarantee
as part of the payment for the consideration of the subject parcel of land.
As you represented, your bank shall guarantee payment of the forty percent
(40%) of the consideration after all the titles of the property are transferred
to your company. The remaining balance thereof will be paid within a
period of six (6) months thereafter.

At the outset, please be informed that local government units are also
corporate entities and as such, they can exercise corporate powers as an
ordinary corporation which include the power to acquire and convey real
property and, for that purpose, to enter into contracts (Sec. 22 (a); Local
Government Code of 1991), subject to the condition that the Local Chief
Executive, in representing the local government unit in the contract, must
have been authorized by the sanggunian concerned to enter the same
(Section 22 (c), Ibid). Local government units enjoy full autonomy in the
exercise of their proprietary functions and in the management of their
economic affairs, subject to the limitations provided in the Code and other
applicable laws (Section 22 (d), Ibid.)

Anent your query, we answer in the affirmative.

Bank guarantee is a legally accepted means of paying obligations. In
fact, it gives the seller maximum security that he will receive his money. In
BSP Monetary Board Circular No. 425, series of 2004 dated March 25,
2004, a bank guarantee is defined as "an irrevocable commitment of a
bank binding itself to pay a sum of money in the event of non-performance of a contract by a third party". The guarantee is a
commitment separate and distinct from the principal debt or contract.

It is our considered opinion that the City of Santa Rosa may accept
the bank guarantee as a means of payment by the CRC Realty Development
Corporation on the sale of the subject property provided that the former
with its consent thereto and that the following set of rules are complied
with:

1) Section 35.1 to 35.3 of Republic Act 8791, otherwise known as
the "General Banking Law of 2000", state that:

"SEC. 35. Limit on Loans, Credit Accommodations
and Guarantees.-

35.1. Except as the Monetary Board may
otherwise prescribe for reasons of national interest, the
total amount of loans, credit accommodations and
guarantees as may be defined by the Monetary Board
that may be extended by a bank to any person,
partnership, association, corporation or other entity
shall at no time exceed twenty percent (20%) of the net
worth of such bank. The basis for determining
compliance with single-borrower limit is the total credit
commitment of the bank to the borrower.

35.2. Unless the Monetary Board prescribes
otherwise, the total amount of loans, credit
accommodations and guarantees prescribed in the
preceding paragraph may be increased by an additional
ten percent (10%) of the net worth of such bank
provided that additional liabilities of any borrower are
adequately secured by trust receipts, shipping
documents, warehouse receipts or other similar
documents transferring or securing title covering
readily marketable, non-perishable goods which must
be fully covered by insurance.

35.3. The above-prescribed ceilings shall include:
(a) the direct liability of the maker or acceptor of paper
discounted with or sold to such bank and the liability
of a general indorser, drawer or guarantor who obtains
a loan or other credit accommodation from or discounts
paper with or sells papers to such bank; (b) in the case
of an individual who owns or controls a majority
interest in a corporation, partnership, association or
any other entity, the liabilities of said entities to such
bank; (c) in the case of a corporation, all liabilities to
such bank of all subsidiaries in which such corporation
owns or controls a majority interest; and in the case
of a partnership, association or other entity, the liabilities
of the members thereof to such bank." (Emphasis
supplied)

2) In Circular No. 425, series of 2004, the Monetary Board of the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas approved an amendment to Subsection X347.2
of the Manual of Regulations for Banks (MOR) to implement the foregoing
Section 35 of RA 8791.