Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magapagal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
LEGAL SERVICE
31 January 2007

HON. WENCESLAO B. TRINIDAD
Pasay City

Dear Sir:

This is a rejoinder to your letter dated 29 January 2007 where you requested "assistance in ensuring a smooth turn-over of the functions and duties between councilor Alan T. Panaligan, the acting Mayor and other City officials designated by your Office, and the undersigned duly elected Mayor of Pasay City and the other elected City Official's", as it is your contention that the Motions for Reconsideration filed by you, Vice Mayor Calikto and other Councilors with the Ombudsman in OMB-C-A-06-0013-A and the Appeals of Councilors Arnel Regino T. Arceo and Richard Advincula of said Ombudsman decision with the Court of Appeals have the effect of staying the said decision pursuant to the cases of Manuel Lapid
vs. E.C.A. (G.R. No. 14226, 29 June 2000) and Office of the Ombudsman vs.
Pendatun Laja (G.R. No. 169241, 02 May 2006).

We disagree. This issue had already been settled in the very recent case of "In the Matter to Declare in Contempt of Court Hon. Simeon A. Datumanong" (G.R. No. 150274, 04 August 2006), where the Court held and we quote, viz:

"However, two events supervened since the filing
of this petition that would support its dismissal. First,
xxx. Second, Section 7, Rule III of the Rules of
Procedure of the Office of the Ombudsman was amended
by Administrative Order No. 17 wherein the pertinent
provision on the execution of decisions pending appeal
is now essentially similar to Section 47 of the Uniform
Rules on Administrative Cases in the Civil Service and
other related laws, thus:

Rule III

PROCEDURE IN ADMINISTRATIVE CASES

"Section 7. Finality and execution of decision.-

An appeal shall not stop the decision from being
executory. In case the penalty is suspension or removal
and the respondent wins such appeal, he shall be
considered as having been under preventive suspension
and shall be paid the salary and such other
enumerations that he did not receive by reason of the
suspension or removal."

This ruling of the Court, in effect, already abandoned the doctrine in
the cases of Lapid, Laja and Lopez. The Supreme Court, no less, already
took judicial notice and acknowledged the recent amendment to the Rules
of Procedure of the Ombudsman which now provided for the rule of
execution pending appeal of an Ombudsman decision.

Additionally, even the filing of a Motion for Reconsideration thereon
will not operate to stop the implementation of the Ombudsman decision.
This is the express import found in Memorandum Circular No. 01 dated 11
April 2006 of the Office of the Ombudsman, which provides that: "The
filing of a motion for reconsideration or a petition for review before
the Office of the Ombudsman does not operate to stay the
immediate implementation of the foregoing Ombudsman decisions,
orders or resolutions".

In view of the position of this Department that Ombudsman
decisions are now immediately executory even pending appeal or the
pendency of a motion for reconsideration, your request cannot be given
due course as it has no legal basis.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

By Authority of the Secretary:

G. I. EMETERIO S. MORENO, JR.
Director III

Legal:09/La
cc: Director Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG - National Capital Region
LMP Building, Ermin Garcia St.
Cubao, Quezon City