Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahai St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

ATTY. DIONISIO A. TEJERO
ATTY. CRISPIN V. AMORANTO
D.A. Tejero and Amoranto Law Offices
Unit 8-B, 8th Floor, STRATA 2000 Building
F. Ortigas Jr. Rd. (formerly Emerald Avenue)
Ortigas Center 1605 Pasig City

Gentlemen:

This has reference to your earlier letter seeking for our legal opinion
on the following aforequoted queries, to wit:

"(1) Whether or not pursuant to the provisions of the
Local Government Code, a Barangay, through its Barangay
Council, can enter into a contract with a private company for the
supply of goods and manpower requirements for some of the
latter's specific projects;

(2) Whether or not, in the procurement of the supplies
and labor for the projects, the Barangay has to comply with the
Procurement law;

(3) Whether or not the funds and income generated
from the above corporate and proprietary activities form part of
the general funds of the Barangay or a separate fund specifically
for the conduct of the business. And additionally, whether these
funds are subject to audit by the Commission on Audit;

(4) Whether or not, the workers employed by the
Barangay for the projects with the private company, are
considered public employees or private employees of the
Barangay;

(5) Whether or not the Barangay has to obtain a license
from the Municipality or any agency of government to legitimize
the above described proprietary activity, particularly with regards
to the labor it supplies to the private company."

Per your letter, a private company (which happens to be your client)
is undertaking mineral exploration activities at its approved project site,
which covers several provinces in the country. According to you, such
activities are being undertaken by your client simultaneously in various
barangays within said provinces. There being a strong clamor from the
residents of the various barangays that they be given priority in
employment by your client since, according to them, after all, the
explorations are undertaken within their territorial jurisdictions and said
activities are good opportunities for them to earn income even on a weekly
rotation basis to equitably distribute the available work.

In view of the foregoing, coupled with a commitment to abide by the
provisions under Republic Act 7942 (Mining Act of 1995) and its
Implementing Rules and Regulations, your client now seeks to enter into a
formal agreement with the barangays concerned for the latter to provide
the former with materials and labor needed for your client’s exploration
activities. Thus, the barangays concerned, pursuant to the proposed
agreement, will hire some of its residents to work in the exploration sites.
The barangay's assigned supervisors will manage these barangay-hired
workers. In turn, your client will pay the barangay concerned a specified
amount, either on a weekly or periodic basis, which covers the value of the
materials provided and of the services rendered by the barangay hired
workers. Hence, your foregoing queries.

At the outset, Section 15 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA
7160) provides that "(e)very local government unit created or
recognized under the Code is a body politic endowed with powers to
be exercised by it in conformity with law. As such, it shall exercise
powers as a political subdivision of the national government and as
a corporate entity representing the inhabitants of its territory."
This is the so-called dual functions of local government units, i.e.
governmental and proprietary functions.

Governmental powers are those exercised in administering the
powers of the state and promoting the public welfare and they include the
legislative, judicial, public and political. Proprietary powers, on the other
hand, are exercised for the special benefit and advantage of the community
and include those which are ministerial, private and corporate (City of
Manila vs. IAC, GR No. 71159, 15 November 1989 and Surigao Electric Co., Inc.
vs. Municipality of Surigao, GR No. L-22766, 30 August 1968). In its
governmental functions, the local government unit acts as an agent of the
State for the government of the territory and the inhabitants. In its
proprietary functions, the local government unit acts as an agent of the
community in the administration of local affairs. As such, it acts as a
separate entity for its own purposes and not as a subdivision of the state
(Lidasan vs. Comelec, 21 SCRA 496).

This dual nature of a local government unit has to be related with the
corporate powers of every local government unit under Section 22 of the
Code, which we quoted hereunder, to wit:

"SECTION 22. Corporate powers.—(a) Every local
government unit, as a corporation, shall have the
following powers: