REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

24 October 2007

PUNONG BARANGAY EDWIN E. CRUZ
Barangay New Zaniga
Mandaluyong City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter dated 27 September 2007 requesting this Department’s legal opinion re the following issues:

1. "Whether or not Landbank can refuse
acknowledgement of the temporary appointment
despite the DILG directive allowing temporary
appointment, thus hampering the barangay
operations?

2. Whether specific document can be presented to
Landbank in lieu of the Barangay Resolution stating
concurrence of the Barangay Kagawads in the
appointment of the Barangay Treasurer?

3. Aside from filing an administrative case for abuse of
authority against the erring Kagawads with the
Sangguniang Panlungsod, what disciplinary action
can be legally taken against them?"

In reply to your first and second queries, we note that there was no
mention in your letter as to whether or not the Landbank, Shaw Boulevard
Branch, Mandaluyong City, was already made aware of the existence of
the DILG Memorandum Circular No. 150-02-A, where it was provided that the
appointment of a Barangay Treasurer is immediately effective and that the
latter can already enter into the office and discharge the functions thereof
pending concurrence by the Sangguniang Barangay concerned. We believe
that if the Landbank was only informed of the said DILG issuance, it will
reasonably give due course to your request. As proof to the Landbank, we
are furnishing you herewith certified xerox copy of the same for your ready
reference.

Anent your third query, may we note that insofar as the filing of
administrative cases against elective barangay officials are concerned, the
Sangguniang Panlungsod of Mandaluyong City enjoys concurrent jurisdiction
with the Office of the Ombudsman applying the pronouncement of the
Supreme Court in the case of Hagad vs. Gozo-Dadole (12 December 1995).
We inform you, however, that pursuant to a Supreme Court Circular on non-
forum shopping, you can file the administrative case either before the
Sangguniang Panlawigwan or before the Office of the Ombudsman. Hence,
as per your representation, since you have already filed the administrative
case before the Sangguniang Panlungsod, then you are already precluded
from filing a similar administrative case of the same nature before the Office
of the Ombudsman.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

cc: Director Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG - National Capital Region
LMP Bldg., Ermin Garcia St.
Cubao, Quezon City