Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
C. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 47 S. 2005
September 23, 2005

MR. JULIO JAIME
Barangay Councilor
Moonwalk, Parañaque

Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the following issues to wit:

1. As far as DILG is concerned, is the implementation of AO-103 directly mandatory to the local government units (LGUs)?

2. Has there been an issuance or any order, directive, or instruction from the DILG directed to Local Government Units (LGUs) in relation to the enforcement and exemption of AO-103?

3. Clarification as to whether or not the previous elected barangay officials who rendered service within the period from 1992 to 2003 may be authorized to claim their leave credit benefits subject to availability of appropriations and within the 55% ceiling of personnel service.

4. Can the DILG issue an opinion in relation to the DILG region-XII position on the claim of accumulated leave credits of former sangguniang barangay officials prior to the effectivity of CSC-DBM Joint Circular No. 1, s. 2004?

In reply to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 6 of Administrative Order No. 103 otherwise known as "Directing the Continued Adoption of Austerity Measures in the Government" dated August 31, 2004 which provides that: "The legislative and judicial branches of government, as well as agencies vested with fiscal autonomy, such as constitutional commissions and local governments, are strongly urged to adopt the provision of this order."

A reading of the said Section 6 as aforequoted would readily give us the conclusion that, in recognition of the constitutional principle of local and fiscal autonomy being enjoyed by local government units, the provisions of AO 103 are not mandatory for local government units but are merely directory. This is evident from the fact, that LGUs are merely urged to adopt the provisions of AO 103.

Relative to your second query, please be informed that the DILG has not issued any orders, directives or instructions to the Local Government Units in relation to the enforcement and exemptions of Executive Order 103.

Be that as it may, the DILG issued a memorandum Circular No. 2004-130, dated October 1, 2004, relative to the observance of Austerity measures. The said Circular directed all Provincial Governors, City Mayors, Municipal Mayors, DILG Directors and other concerned for the observance and implementation of Austerity measures.

In addition thereto, Section 1 of AO 103 as cited in DILG OPINION NO. 101 s. 2004, dated November 4, 2004 covers all National Government Agencies, State Universities and Colleges, Government-owned and controlled Corporation (GOCCs), Government Financial Institutes (GFIs) and other Government Corporate Entities under the Executive Department. Thus, Local Government Units enjoying fiscal autonomy are not covered by AO 103, although they are urged to adopt the national policy on austerity.

With regard to your third and fourth queries, at the outset, may we invite your attention to the 3rd paragraph of Section 81 of the Local Government Code which provides that "Elective local officials shall be entitled to the same leave privileges as those enjoyed by appointive local officials including the cumulation and commutation thereof."

In view thereof, local elective officials are entitled to the same leave privileges enjoyed by local appointive officials. However, the procedure in claiming the said benefits has to be addressed by the Civil Service Commission, being the central personnel agency which provided for the scheme and/or procedure for that claim.

It is to be noted also that the DBM and CSC issued Joint Circular No. 1, s. 2004 entitled: "Leave Benefits of Barangay Officials," to institutionalize the leave privileges of barangay officials including the cumulation and commutation thereof. However, the joint circular appears to have not provided for the procedure in claiming the said benefits prior to the effectivity of the said Joint Circular, i.e., from 1992-2003. In this regard, you are advised to seek clarification on the matter from the DBM or CSC. In the meantime, this Department will also make representations with the CSC and DBM and will render guidance on this.