Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Magpamahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MS. ALICIA P. ESPIRITU
Sangguniang Panlungsod Member
Iriga City

03 March 2009

Dear Madam:

This refers to your request for this Department's legal opinion on the following queries, to wit:

1. "Is Memorandum Circular No. 151 issued by the office of the President applicable in the filling up of vacant positions in the Sangguniang Panlungsod of a component city?"

2. Do Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod possess the necessary powers or authority to review the documents supporting the appointment of the Governor issued pursuant to Section 45 of the Local Government Code?"

In reply to your first query, please be informed that Memorandum Circular No. 151 dated 25 March 1992 has been issued by the Office of the President to address the filling up of vacancy in highly urbanized cities and independent component cities where the President is the one empowered to appoint to fill up permanent vacancies in the Sangguniang Panlungsod of highly urbanized cities and independent component cities per Section 45 (a) (1) of the Local Government Code of 1991.

It is, therefore, apparent that Memorandum Circular No. 151 only applies when the vacancy to be filled up is either in the Sangguniang Panlalawigan or in the Sangguniang Panlungsod of highly urbanized cities and independent component cities. Perforce, it is our position that Memorandum Circular No. 151 does not apply when the vacancy to be filled up is in the Sangguniang

Panlungsod of a component city, such as the City of Iriga as the same is governed by Section 45 (a) (2) of the Local Government Code.

Insofar as the second query is concerned, may we invite your attention to Section 45 (b) and (c) of the Local Government Code, which provides:

"SEC. 45. Permanent Vacancies in the Sangguniang... xxx (b) Except for the sangguniang barangay, only the nominee of the political party under which the sangguniang member concerned had been elected and whose elevation to the position next higher in rank created the last vacancy in the sangguniang shall be appointed in the manner hereinabove provided. The appointee shall come from the same political party as that of the sangguniang member who caused the vacancy and shall serve the unexpired term of the vacant office. In the appointment herein mentioned, a nomination and a certificate of membership of the political party concerned are conditions sine qua non, and any appointment without such nomination and certification shall be null and void ab initio and shall be a ground for administrative action against the official responsible therefor.

(c) In case the permanent vacancy is caused by a sangguniang member who does not belong to any political party, the local chief executive shall, upon recommendation of the sangguniang concerned, appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy."

Hence, there are two (2) instances wherein a vacancy in the Sangguniang may be addressed, i.e., (a) when the person who caused the last vacancy belongs to a political party or (b) the person who caused the last vacancy does not belong to a political party.

If the scenario is covered by the first instance, it is rather clear that the evaluation and nomination of the appointee to fill up the said vacancy rests exclusively within the prerogative and discretion of the concerned political party. Thus, the Sangguniang Panlungsod where the appointee is to serve, does not have any authority or power to review the documents relative to the appointment of the latter.