Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
B. Francisco Gold Condominium || Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahial St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

n HOR RRROR AO LB OP

August 07, 2006

MR. ROSENDO A. MORALES
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
Calbayog City

Dear Mr. Morales:

This has reference to your eartier letter in connection with the publication of your
city ordinances with penal sanctions in a newspaper of general circulation as requir
under Section 511 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) and Article 11
Rule XVII of tts Implementing Rules and Regulations.

In your letter, you manifested that the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Calbayog ha
decided to publish all approved city ordinances in Leyte Samar Daily -Express,
newspaper of general circulation in Region VIII based on the Resolution issued by th
Office of the Executive Judge, Regional Trial Court, 8" Judicial Region, Branch 32, Hal
of Justice, Calbayog City. Said Resolution of the Executive Judge classified the Leyt
Samar Daily Express as a newspaper of general circulation on the premise tnat it i
accredited to be the first and only daily newspaper circulating in Region VIII and hal
been in existence for almost eighteen (18) years.

— (Dwr ur

UT TD

Several newspapers were recently established but are existing only for about
year or less with two (2) to four (4) issues a month. The publishers of these newl
established newspapers approached and requested you that the city ordinances b
instead published in their respective newspapers. You thought of accommodating the
but you wanted first to seek our legal opinion on the following queries which we quate
herein in toto:

ToS TD <a

\

“(1) Is accreditation of a newspaper necessary? ;

(2) Is there a need for a track record?
(3) What does “newspaper of general circulation” mean?

In the event that you have decided to transfer the publication of city ordinance
from a daily newspaper issue to that of a weekly or a monthly issue, you again asked a
additional query on whether or not in doing so, you will violate any provisions of law.

At the outset, please be informed that Article 114 (Rule XVII) of the Rules an
Regulations Implementing the Local Government Code of 1991 pertains to posting an
publication of ordinance with penal sanctions and not Article 122 (Rule XVIII), as cited i
your letter.

Article 114 (Rule XVI) of the IRR provides that:

"ART. 114. Posting and Publication of Ordinance with Penal
Sanctions.—(a) Ordinances with penal sanctions shall be posted at
prominent places in the provincial capitol, city, municipal or barangay hall,

such ordinances shall also be published in _a newspaper of general
circulation, where available, within the territorial jurisdiction of the local
government unit concerned, except in the case of barangay ordinances.
Unless otherwise provided therein, said ordinances shall take effect on the
day following its publication, or at the end of the periad of posting,
whichever occurs /ater.”
XXX XXX XXX
(Emphasis Supplied)

as the case may be, for a minimum period of three (3) consecutive weeks. {

Based on the foregoing, in order that publication of ordinances with pend
sanctions is complied with, it is required that “such ordinances must be published in
newspaper of general circulation, where available, within the territorial jurisdiction of th
local government unit concerned, except in the case of barangay ordinances’.

Anent your queries, we shall answer first your third query.

As to what constitute a newspaper of general circulation, the Supreme Court ha
an opportunity to enumerate the requirements thereof in the case of Fortune Motor

72(1996)] citing Bonnevie vs. Court of Appeals [125 SCRA 122 (1983)], to wit:

(Phils.), Inc. vs. Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company and CA [265 “

“To be a newspaper of general circulation, it is enough that it is
published for the dissemination of local news and general information: that
it has _a bona fide subscription list_of paying subscribers, that it is
published at regular intervals (Basa v. Mercado, 61 Phil. 632) The

—

Urvtr

ao

newspaper need not have the largest circulation so long as it is of general
circulation. (Banta v. Pacheco, 74 Phil. 67).” (Emphasis Supplied)

Hence, for as lang as the newspaper meets the minimum requirements set fort
under the abovecited Bonnevie and Fortune Motors cases as to what constitutes
newspaper of general circulation, itis our view that accreditation and track record aske
in your first and second queries, respectively, are no longer necessary in order for
newspaper to be considered as a newspaper of general circulation. It is enough th
the newspaper is (1) published for the dissemination of local news and general
information, (2) it has a bona fide subscription list of paying subscribers; and (3) it i
published at regular intervals.

Finally, if you choose to transfer the publication of city ordinances from a dail
newspaper issue to that of a weekly or a monthly issue, it is our view that, with respe
to the requirement of publication under Section 511 of the Loca! Government Code, n
law will be violated. The Bonnevie and Fortune Motors cases only require that th
publication be made at regular intervals. The term “regular intervals” is too general a
to encompass even a weekly or monthly issue. Furthermore, Article 114 of the IRR di
not expressly provide that the newspaper must be of daily issue. Hence, newspaper
that issue publications in a monthly or weekly basis may still qualify as a newspaper
general circulation as it is published at regular intervals.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

An m——~4

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary for Administration,

Legal & Legislative Liaison
Legal: 17

