INTERIOR AND?

Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL

#Y #Pridde 43. પ 2 GOVERNMENT

10 October 2006

MR. BRIAN KRISTIANN AMINTUAN BAYONA

SK Chairman and SK City Federation Vice President Barangay 98, Zone 14, Pasay City

Dear Mr. Bayona:

This pertains to your letter requesting that you be officially appointed as Acting Ex-Officio Member of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Pasay City in view of the preventive suspension for six (6) months imposed upon the City SK Federation President by the Office of the Ombudsman and being the incumbent SK City Federation Vice President of Pasay City.

In reply thereto, may you be apprised that there is no more need for official appointment. Your assumption to office as temporary Ex-Officio Member of the Sangguniang Panlungsod is by operation of law and the Constitution and By Laws of the Sangguniang Kabataan Federation.

Article VIII, Section 2 of the SK Constitution and By Laws provides that the Vice President is the next highest officer of the federation and as such, he/she shall, among others, discharge the functions of the President in case the latter dies, resigns, becomes physically incapacitated or is' suspended or removed from office.

Corollarily, Article XVI, Section 3 of the SK Constitution and By Laws likewise provides that in case the President of the federation is suspended as a result of an administrative case, the Vice President shall automatically assume the office of the federation president in an acting capacity until such time that the president reassumes his office. Further, he shall discharge the powers and duties and enjoy the rights and privileges appurtenant to the office including representation in the Sanggunian and the receipt of the corresponding monetary remuneration for the service rendered.

On your position that the preventive suspension of the SK Federation President deems to include the position of SK Chairman, the same is well taken.

Some camps would argue that the preventive suspension of the SK President, having been charged together with the other members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, would only pertain to his being an Ex-Officio Member of the Sangguniang Panlungsod. We are not persuaded.

The preventive suspension of a public official shall encompass the public office being held by the public official under preventive suspension,