D

File

Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.

Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT APPED AFTNON N01-2007...... 02 January 2007

7.7

MR. ROLANDO M. LARRACAS

Sangguniang Bayan Member

Boac, Marinduque

Dear SB Member Larracas:

This refers to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the following issues, to wit:

1. "Can a valid and effective ordinance, approved by both Sangguniang Bayan and the Sangguniang Panlalawigan and not otherwise declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, (be) suspended by the Local Chief Executive?

2. Is the opinion of the CSC field officer a rational legal basis to suspend implementation?

3. Is the continuous proposal of annual appropriations to fund a repeated organizational structure accepted as a legal tool to circumvent the mandated duties of the Local Chief Executive provided under Section 444 of the Local Government Code of 1991? And

4. What would be or what is the extent of liability of the Sangguniang Bayan whose explicit duty in providing remedy to the budget remains remised or its responsibility and unperturbed to the non- implementation of the reorganizational ordinance?"

You stated that your municipality passed Municipal Ordinance No. 03- 091 (reorganizational ordinance) providing for the reorganization of the organizational structure and staffing pattern of that municipal government. Upon review by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, the same was declared consistent with law. It became then a necessity to appropriate funds to meet the financial outlay for the newly created offices and salaries under the new staffing pattern since the same was not covered by the Annual Regular Appropriations which was approved on 15 December 2003. Thus, on 15 March 2004, the, municipality came up with a revised Annual Budget for 2004 in order to provide for the necessary funds for the newly created offices. However, upon review by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, the revised Annual Budget for 2004 was declared to be inoperative and unenforceable because it went beyond the limitations set forth under Section