REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor.
Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
Tel. Nos.: 9250361/9207783/9250347 (Fax)
Direct Linus: 925-03-40; 925-03-33
Fax No.: 925-03-41

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

March 15, 2005

MAYOR CESAR C. SULIBIT
Liliw, Laguna

Dear Mayor Sulibit:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the following
quoted queries, to wit:

1. Whether or not the Punong Barangay who went out of the
   country can still collect his honorarium.

2. Whether there is a prescriptive period on the said absence. 
   (He filed a six (6) months vacation leave)

3. Who will assume the position of the Punong Barangay on the
   span of time he is having his vacation.

4. What is the status of the leave of the Punong barangay if he
   sent his Application for Leave two (2) days after his
   departure.

5. Whether or not the designation as Officer in Charge of the 4th
   Kagawaş of the Sanggunian Barangay by the Punong
   Bayan is valid.

In reply to your first query, please be informed that barangay officials are
compensated in the form of honoraria pursuant to the Department of Budget
and Management Local Budget Circular No. 63 dated October 22, 1996. In
relation to the said DBM Circular, Section 288 of the Government Accounting
and Auditing Manual also provides that services must be rendered before a
public official shall be entitled to receive the honorarium appurtenant thereto.

In view thereof, the punong barangay who travels abroad cannot
collect/claim his honorarium because there is here the absence of the required
actual services rendered.

In reply to your second query, may we invite your attention to Section 81,
3rd par. of the Local Government Code of 1991 which provides that "Elective
local officials shall be entitled to the same leave privileges as those enjoyed by
appointive local officials, including the commutation and commutation thereof."
Corollary thereto, Section 5 of CSC Memo Circular No. 41 s. 1998 also provides
that "xxx local elective officials shall be entitled to leave privileges as those
enjoyed by appointive local officials xxx". In this regard, Section 57 of the
above-mentioned circular also provides that: "Leave without pay not
exceeding one year may be granted, in addition to the vacation and sick
leave earned, but without pay in excess of one month shall require the
clearance of the proper head of department or agency."

Ergo, we are of the view that a leave of absence for one year may be
availed of by the concerned Punong Barangay.

With regard to your 3rd and 5th query, Section 46(a) of the Local
Government Code of 1991 provides for the rule on who has the right to assume
office in case of temporary vacancy in the Office of the Punong Barangay. It
states that:

"SECTION 46(a) - When the governor, city or municipal mayor or
   punong barangay is temporarily incapacitated to perform his duties for
   physical or legal reasons such as, but not limited to, leave of absence,
   travel abroad, and suspension from office, the vice governor, city or
   municipal vice-mayor or the highest ranking sangguniang barangay
   member shall automatically exercise the powers and perform the duties
   and functions of the local chief executive concerned, except the power
to appoint, suspend, or dismiss employees which can only be exercised if
the period of temporary incapacity exceeds thirty (30) working days."

Under this premise, it is clear that the highest ranking sangguniang
barangay member shall automatically assume the office of the punong
barangay.