Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
B. Francisco Gola Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

09 July 2007

MS. ASUNCION DEL PRADO
President, United Hills Association, Inc.
Narra St., United Hills Village
Barangay San Martin De Porres
Parañaque City

Dear Ms. Del Prado:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our opinion on whether or not conflict of interest arises on the part of a Punong Barangay or a member of the Sangguniang Barangay when he, at the same time, becomes the President or Member of the Board of Directors of a Homeowner's Association within the barangay.

Before dealing squarely with your query, we deem it proper to give some discussions on the pertinent provisions of law applicable in the case at hand.

Section 3(j) of Republic Act 6713, as amended, otherwise known as the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees defines conflict of interest in the following manner:

"SECTION 3. Definition of Terms.--As used in this Act, the term:

xxx
(i) "Conflict of interest" arises when a public official or employee is a member of a board, an officer, or a substantial stockholder of a private corporation or owner or has a substantial interest in a business and the interest of such corporation or business, or his rights or duties therein, may be opposed to or affected by the faithful performance of official duty."  
(Emphasis Supplied)

In relation hereto, Sections 7 and 9 of the same Code providing for the legal consequences when conflict of interest arises, provides aid we quote:

"SECTION 7. Prohibited Acts and Transactions.--In addition to acts and omissions of public officials and employees now prescribed in the Constitution and existing laws, the following shall constitute prohibited acts and transactions of any public official and employee and are hereby declared to be unlawful:

(a) Financial and material interest.--Public officials and employees shall not, directly or indirectly, have any financial or material interest in any transaction requiring the approval of their office.

(b) Outside employment and other activities related thereto.--Public officials and employees during their incumbency shall not:

(1) Own, control, manage or accept employment as officer, employee, consultant, counsel, broker, agent, trustee or nominee in any private enterprise regulated, supervised or licensed by their office unless expressly allowed by law;"

xxx

"SECTION 9. A public official or employee shall avoid conflicts of interest at all times. When a conflict of interest arises, he shall resign from his position in any private business enterprise within thirty (30) days from his assumption of office and or divest himself of his shareholdings or interest within sixty (60) days from such assumption. xxx"

Also, worthy of note is Section 3(h) and (i) of RA 3019, otherwise known as the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act which provide and we quote:

"SECTION 3. Corrupt practices of public officers.--In addition to acts or omissions of public officers already penalized by existing law, the following shall constitute corrupt practices of any public officer and are hereby declared to be unlawful:

xxx

(h) Directly or indirectly having financial or pecuniary interest in any business, contract or transaction in connection with which he intervenes or takes part in his official capacity, or in which he is prohibited by the Constitution or by any law from having any interest.

(i) Directly or indirectly becoming interested, for personal gain, or having a material interest in any transaction or act requiring the approval of a board, panel or group of which he is a member, and which exercises discretion in such action, even if he votes against the same or does not participate in the action of the board, committee, panel or group.

Interest for personal gain shall be presumed against those public officers responsible for the approval of manifestly unlawful, inequitable, or