Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

24 October 2007

MR. DOMINIC A. DIÑO
c/o EUGENIO F. FAELNAR
3rd Floor, City Savings Financial Plaza
Osmeña Boulevard, Cebu City

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the issue, to
wit:

"Is Eugenio F. Faelnar, the incumbent Punong
Barangay of Guadalupe, Cebu City qualified to run this
coming 2007 Barangay Election?"

Per your letter, he was elected to the aforementioned position during
the 1994, 1997 and 2002 elections, respectively. However, during the
1997 election, he was not able to assume the position as he was not
proclaimed winner by reason of the pending two (2) criminal cases for
violation of the Election Code filed before the RTC of Cebu City.

The sangguniang barangay member who received the highest number
of votes, assumed as the Punong Barangay. It was only sometime in
February 1998 that he was finally able to assume the office of the Punong
Barangay of Guadalupe.

Hence, this query.

In reply thereto, we deem it proper to give some discussions on the
pertinent provisions of law applicable in the case at hand.

"SEC. 43. Term of Office.- (a) The term of office of
all local elective officials elected after the effectivity of
this Code shall be three (3) years, starting from noon of
June 20, 1992 or such date as may be provided for by
law; except that of elective barangay officials:
Provided, that all local officials first elected during the
local elections immediately following the ratification of
the 1987 Constitution shall serve until noon of June 30,
1992.

(b) No local elective official shall serve for more
than three (3) consecutive terms in the same position.
Voluntary renunciation of the office of any length of

consecutive term limit rule, is to be reckoned from the 1994 barangay
elections. Important to note is the provision under Section 2 of RA 9164 as
aforequoted providing that voluntary renunciation of office for any length of
time shall not be considered as an interruption in the continuity of service for
the full term for which the elective official was elected. Resignation is one
instance where there is voluntary renunciation of an office by the elective
local official concerned.

Going now to your query, we are of the view that the 1997 term of
the Punong Barangay concerned cannot be considered as one term since he
was not able to fully serve the 1997-2002 term.

Hence, the Punong Barangay concerned is still eligible/qualified to run
for reelection to the same position in 29 October 2007 barangay and SK
elections.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary