Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

22 June 2009

MR. FELICASIO F. JAVIER
Puerto Princesa City
Palawan

Dear Mr. Javier:

This has reference to your earlier handwritten letter asking our legal opinion on whether Vice-Mayor Cecil Bayron of Puerto Princesa City may still run for the same office come 2010 Synchronized National and Local Elections.

Per your handwritten letter, Cecil Bayron ran for the position of Vice-Mayor in Puerto Princesa City in the 2001 local elections. Unfortunately, his opponent, Dong Batul, was proclaimed winner therein. Cecil Bayron filed an election protest, which was thereafter decided in his favor. By virtue thereof, he served only for more than one (1) year in said position.

In 2004 local elections, Cecil Bayron again ran as Vice-Mayor and won. This time, he served the full term thereof.

In 2007 local elections, Cecil Bayron again ran as Vice-Mayor and won. He is now the incumbent Vice-Mayor of that City.

In view of the foregoing, You are now seeking our legal opinion on whether Cecil Bayron, assuming that he will again serve in full his current term of office, is still qualified to run for re-election as Vice-Mayor in the forthcoming 2010 elections.

Your query may have been impelled by the express provisions of Section 8, Article X of the 1987 Constitution and Section 43 (b) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), which we quote:

"SECTION 8. The term of office of elective local officials, except barangay officials, which shall be determined by law, shall be three years and no such official shall serve for more than three consecutive terms. Voluntary renunciation of the office for any length of time shall not be considered as an interruption in the continuity of his service for the full term for which he was elected."

"SECTION 43. Term of Office. - xxx
(b) No local elective official shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive terms in the same position. Voluntary renunciation of the office for any length of time shall not be considered as an interruption in the continuity of service for the full term for which the elective official concerned was elected."

The foregoing provisions are the bases for the so-called three-consecutive term limit rule among local elective officials, which disqualifies them from running for the same position after serving the same for three consecutive terms.

In the leading case of Borja vs. COMELEC (G.R. No. 138495, 08 September 1998) and further bolstered in the case of Lonzada vs. COMELEC (G.R. No. 135150, 28 July 1999), the Supreme Court consistently held that in order for the aforementioned three-consecutive term limit rule to apply on elective local officials holding the same position, the following requisites must concur: (1) that the local elective official must have been elected to that position; and (2) the local elective official must have fully served that same position for three-consecutive terms. If these circumstances are present, then the concerned local official is already disqualified to run for the same position on his supposed fourth consecutive term.

Applying therefore the ruling under the Borja and Lonzada cases in the case of Vice-Mayor Cecil Bayron, we are of the view that the second condition above is not present so that the proscribed three-consecutive term limit rule will not apply. Vice-Mayor Bayron cannot be considered to have fully served his supposedly first term in office considering that he only served for the unexpired portion of the term, that is, for more than 1 year or only after the election protest was decided in his favor. Thus, the same shall be considered as an interruption in the continuity of service for the first term in which he was elected.