Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

February 20, 2006

VICE-MAYOR MIGUEL M. MANIAGO, JR.
Sta. Cruz, Zambales

Dear Vice-Mayor Maniago:

This pertains to your SB Resolution No. 04-001 dated August 23, 2004
entitled: "RESOLUTION REQUESTING THE LEGAL OPINION OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (HEAD OFFICE)
- LEGAL DEPARTMENT IF THE SANGGUNIANG BAYAN HAS JURISDICTION
OVER AN ADMINISTRATIVE CASE FILED AGAINST A BARANGAY CAPTAIN
FOR MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE, ABUSE OF AUTHORITY AND COMMISSION OF
OFFENSE INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE".

Per your Resolution and attached documents, a verified complaint for
misconduct in office, abuse of authority and commission of offense involving moral
turpitude was filed against Punong Barangay Domingo F. Edquilia of Brgy. Bayto
before the Sangguniang Bayan of the Municipality. As alleged in said complaint,
Punong Barangay Edquilia mashed the bosom of the complainant (a minor) named
Emelyn Magrata. Punong Barangay Edquilia moved to dismiss the complaint on the
ground that the Sangguniang Bayan has no jurisdiction to hear the complaint
because the act alleged therein was not in any way related to or connected with the
performance of Punong Barangay Edquilia's official functions and duties as public
officer.

Hence, this request. Likewise, you wish to confirm on whether or not you can
apply the principle that when the crime (acts of lasciviousness in this case)
involving moral turpitude is not linked with the performance of official duties,
conviction by final judgment is required as a condition precedent to administrative
action.

Please be informed that in the case of Civil Service Commission vs. Aliyson
Belagan, G.R. No. 132164, October 19, 2004, citing Lacson v. Roque (92 Phil. 456),
the Supreme Court held that to constitute an administrative offense, misconduct
should relate to or be connected with the performance of the official functions and
duties of a public officer. As to whether or not such a misconduct affects his
performance of his duties as an officer and not only his character as a private
individual, the Supreme Court held that "an offense may be committed in relation
to the office if it cannot exist without the office, or if the office is a constituent
element of the crime as defined in the statute..." (People v. Magallanes 249 SCRA
212).

At the outset, please be informed that in an administrative investigation, a
Motion to Dismiss is not considered a proper pleading in lieu of the Answer. Under

Section 62 of the Local Government Code, what the law requires is an Answer and
not a Motion to Dismiss. Said Section reads:

"Section 62. Notice of hearing. - (a) Within seven (7) days
after the administrative complaint is filed, the Office of the
President or the sangguniang concerned, as the case may be, shall
require the respondent to submit his verified answer within fifteen
(15) days from receipt thereof, and commence the investigation of
the case within ten (10) days after receipt of the such answer of the
respondent xxx"(emphasis supplied)

Be that as it may, and if your IRP allows a Motion to Dismiss, the ground
relied upon by respondent Punong Barangay Domingo F. Edquilia in his motion to
dismiss can only be ascertained and resolved after hearing. Precisely, in the same
provision afore-cited, the law requires the Sanggunian to commence the
investigation of the case after the answer shall have been filed. Consequently,
the Sanggunian should proceed with the hearing of testimonies of witnesses and
marking and presentation of documentary evidence. It is in the hearing that the
Sangguniang will determine whether or not the act complained of is connected with
the performance of the respondent's official duties. That the act complained of is
not connected with Punong Barangay Edquilia's official duties as punong barangay
is a matter of defense which will be subject to consideration by the Sangguniin in
later on rendering a decision.

Same holds true with the ground of abuse of authority. Said ground is
defined as a denial of justice when discretion, by virtue of one’s position, has not
been justly and properly exercised and it signifies the use of that discretion in such
a way as to deprive a person of his right or of the remedy to protect or enforce
such right. There is thus a necessity for actual investigation to determine whether
or not discretion by virtue of one’s official position has been unjustly exercised.

With respect to the ground of commission of an offense involving moral
turpitude, please be informed that it is settled that when the crime involving moral
turpitude is not linked with the performance of official duties, conviction by final
judgment is required as a condition precedent to administrative action. (Palma v.
Mondonado vs. Silvosa 97 Phil. 144-145).

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO TAN ANDANAR
Acting Secretary

cc: DIRECTOR JOSEFINA E. CASTILLA-GO
DILG, Region III
Regional Government Center
Barangay Maimpis
San Fernando, Pampanga