Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapaghamal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DIRECTOR QUIRINO M. LIBUNAO
DILG-Region XI
58 McArthur Highway Matina
Davao City

Dear Director Libunao:

This has reference to your letter-query sent to Director John M. Castañeda, National Barangay Operations Office (NBOO), this Department,
through facsimile seeking clarification on the status of barangay officials
who are currently serving their alleged fourth term in office.

At the outset, may we invite your attention to Section 2 of Republic
Act 9164, otherwise known as "An Act Providing for Synchronized Barangay
and Sangguniang Kabataan Elections, Amending Republic Act No. 7160, as
amended, otherwise known as The Local government Code of 1991 and For Other
Purposes", thus:

"SEC. 2. Term of Office.—The term of office of all
barangay and sangguniang kabataan officials after the
effectivity of this Act shall be three (3) years.

No barangay elective official shall serve for more
than three (3) consecutive terms in the same position:
Provided, however, That the term of office shall be
reckoned from the 1994 barangay elections. Voluntary
renunciation of office for any length of time shall not be
considered as an interruption in the continuity of
service for the full term for which the elective official
was elected." (Emphasis Supplied)

This aforequoted provision is the legal basis for the so-called three-
term limit rule for barangay elective officials, which disqualifies them from
running for the same position after serving the same for three consecutive
terms.

However, it might happen that notwithstanding this rule, or perhaps
by lack of knowledge on the three-term limit rule, or by deliberate disregard
thereof, certain barangay officials were still successfully elected and, in
fact, currently serving their alleged fourth consecutive term in the same
office. Either of these situations might have happened in the case at hand.
For this reason, may we respectfully stress that the discovery of such
violation on the three-term limit rule does not ipso facto result to the
disqualification/removal of these barangay officials. A proper legal action,
using this violation/disqualification as ground therefore, must still be filed
before the proper forum.

As to what are these legal actions and where to file it, may we again
invite your attention to Sections 10 and 11 of COMELEC Resolution No.
8297 dated 06 September 2007 and Section 253, 2nd paragraph of BP 881,
otherwise known as the Omnibus Election Code, thus:

"SECTION 10 - Petitions to deny due course to or
cancellation of a certificate of candidacy.—A verified
petition to deny due course to or cancel a certificate of
candidacy pursuant to Section 69 (nuisance candidate) or
Section 78 (material misrepresentation in the certificate of
candidacy) of the Omnibus Election Code shall be filed
directly with the Office of the Provincial Election Supervisor
concerned by any registered candidate for the same office
personally or through a duly authorized representative within
five (5) days from the last day for filing of certificate of
candidacy. In the National Capital Region, the same shall be
filed directly with the Office of the Regional Election Director concerned.

Filing by mail is not allowed.

Within twenty-four hours from receipt of the petition,
the Provincial Election Supervisor or the Regional Election
Director of the National Capital Region, as the case may be,
shall issue the corresponding summons requiring the
respondent candidate to answer the petition within three (3)