Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

A. Francisco Gold Condominium I, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

NLS OPINION NO._6 5. 300.5_.
28 January 2005

HON. ARIEL P. LIM a
Presidentifil Special Assistant. °
Office of the Presidential Special Assistant
for Tricycle Transport Affairs
Office of the Presidential Adviser for Political Affairs
Room 405 Tahanan ng Masa Building
Office of the President
Malacanang, Manila

Dear Sir:

This refers to your earlier letter requesting for our legal opinion on
certain issues confronting the operation of tricycle in Lapu-Lapu City.

As represented in your letter, it appears that the City Government of
Lapu-Lapu has previously enacted City Ordinance No. 299-97 on 26

February 1997, designating a tricycle lane for public tricycles passing the
Quezon National Highway in that city.

However, on 23 July 2004, Mayor Arturo O. Radaza issued Executive
Order No. 2004-32 suspending the implementation of Ordinance No. 299-97

and prohibiting the tricycles used for public transport from passing the said

highway apparently in response to the transport strike conducted by the
Lapu Lapu City Confederation of Tricycle Operators and Drivers Association,
Inc. (LACTODA) as a protest over the undue delay in the consideration and

approval of their petition for fare adjustment submitted to the local
government unit.

Based on. the foregoing. you would want to solicit our
opinion/comment, particularly on the following queries, to wit:

1. “Whether or not the City Mayor is empowered under
the Local Government Code or any other statute to
unilaterally suspend the implementation of a city
ordinance validly enacted by the local government
unit more than -seven years ago and was in full
effect before the suspension.

2. Whether or not the act of the Mayor in suspending
‘City Ordinance No. 299-97 is valid under the Local
Government Code or any other applicable law.

~2-

3. Whether or not under the foregoing circumstances,
the City Mayor has exceeded its powers under the
Local Government Code by suspending Executive
Order No. 2004-32 apparently as his response to the
tricycle sectors’ constitutional right to peaceably

protest the local government for the redress of their
grievances.

4. Whether or not the tenor of Executive Order No.
“4

-3-

tricycle lane using a portion of the highway within the city, the City Mayor
acted without or in excess of jurisdiction.

We hope that we have enlightened you on the matter.

Legal:72/La
copy fumished:

The Sangguniang Panlungsod
Thru: The Presiding Officer

City Hall, Lapu Lapu City

Director Roberto C. Abejero
DILG Region VII
Cebu City

Very truly yours,

(dps

ANGELO T. REYES

Secretary’

Republic of thr Philippines
rs, DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR

B® AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
é festa mg om

mil iin

