Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT



OLG OPINION #10 S. 2008
12 March 2008


MR. HENRY A. CAPUNO
MLGOO
Municipal Local Government Operations Office
Third Floor, Trojan Building
Biñan, Laguna

Dear Mr. Capuno:

This has reference to your Indorsement dated 15 January 2008 referring to us the basic Kapasiyahan Bilang 001-2008, entitled "Isang Resolusyon ang Binuo at Pinagtibay ng Sangguniang Barangay ng Bungahan, Biñan, Laguna Tungkol sa Napagkaisahang Palitan ang Dati at Ngayon ay Kasalukuyan pa Ring Ingat-Yaman ng Barangay" which was duly adopted on 05 January 2008 by the Sangguniang Barangay of Barangay Bungahan, that Municipality. Your referral basically points to the issue on whether the Punong Barangay of Barangay Bungahan, that Municipality, in appointing the incumbent Barangay Treasurer thereat, violated Section 395 © of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), particularly on the non-appointment of a relative of the punong barangay to the position as Barangay Treasurer within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity and if there is indeed a violation, the Barangay Treasurer should be replaced.

At the outset, may we quote Section 395 © of the Code, viz:

"SECTION 395. Barangay Treasurer: Appointment, Qualifications, Powers and Duties.--xxx xxx xxx
© No person shall be appointed barangay treasurer if he is a sangguniang barangay member, a government employee, or a relative of the punong barangay within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity. xxx xxx xxx
(Emphasis Supplied)

The law is clear, it prohibits appointments of relatives of the punong barangay within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity. Consanguinity means by blood while affinity means by marriage.

Unfortunately, Kapasiyahan Bilang 001-2008 did not clearly indicate the specific relationship of the Punong Barangay to the incumbent Barangay Treasurer. What said Kapasiyahan only mentioned in Paragraph 6 thereof "Sapakat: Ang nasabing Ingat-Yaman ng Barangay ay malapit na kamag anak ng kabiyak ng Punong Barangay". The specific relationship is very important in our determination whether the relationship of the Punong Barangay to the Barangay Treasurer falls within the prohibited appointment of a relative within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity.

Be that as it may, we have quoted Article 966 of the New Civil Code of the Philippines for your guidance on the matter, to wit:

"ARTICLE 966. In the line, as many degrees are counted as there are generations or persons, excluding the progenitor.

In the direct line, ascent is made to the common ancestor. Thus, the child is one degree removed from the parent, two from the grandfather, and three from the great grandparent.

In the collateral line, ascent is made to the common ancestor and then descent is made to the persons with whom the computation is to be made. Thus, a person is two degrees removed from his brother, three from his uncle, who is the brother of his father, four from his first cousin and so forth."

Thus, the fourth civil degree of relationship, either by blood or by affinity, extends to one’s (a) great great grandparents in the direct line of ascendancy, (b) great great grand children in the direct line of descendancy, (c) first cousins, and (d) great grand uncles and aunts in the collateral line.

Finally, the title of the subject Kapasiyahan Bilang 001-2008 readily suggests that the primary objective for its enactment is that of replacing the incumbent barangay treasurer. Please be informed that the incumbent barangay treasurer cannot be replaced without said office. May we advise you that in both instances (removal and replacement), you should follow the pertinent rules on the matter. Under the rules, a barangay treasurer may be removed from office with or without cause. If it be without cause, his removal shall require the concurrence of the majority of all the Sangguniang Barangay members (Alquizola vs. Ocol, G.R. No. 132413, 27 August 1999). On the other hand, if it were for cause, his removal shall be in accordance with the pertinent Civil Service law, rules and regulations and the concurrence of the majority of all the Sangguniang Barangay members is not anymore required.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary
Legal/20:17