Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

A. Francisco Gold Condominium It Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DILG OPINGH NO_IS__s, 200g
28 April 2009

ENGR. ERNESTO L. NATIVIDAD
City Mayor
City of Gapan, Nueva Ecija

Dear Mayor Natividad:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking this Department's
legal opinion as to the legal status of City Ordinance No. 02, series of 2008,
entitled, “An Ordinance Regulating the Establishment, Classification,
Administration and Operation of Government Owned/Operated Public Markets in
the Local Government of Gapan otherwise known as the Market Code of Gapan”.

Per your letter, you stated that you approved City Ordinance No. 02,
series of 2008 or the Market Code of Gapan on 01 September 2008. The
same was thereafter published in a newspaper of local circulation. On 16
September 2008, the Secretary of the Sangguniang Panlungsod forwarded
to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan a copy of the aforesaid Ordinance and,
according to you, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan did not signify any
objection or comment thereto until on the first week of November 2008 or
almost two (2) months from receipt thereof. You averred that members of
the Sangguniang Panlungsod were then summoned to appear before the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan regarding the alleged complaint of several
vendors in Gapan Public Market as to the propriety of the subject
Ordinance. You stated finally that Vice-Mayor Christian U. Tinio, at his own
instance, withdrew the subject Ordinance from the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan and started conducting proceedings to repeal and/or amend
the same.

In view of the foregoing, you are now seeking for enlightenment on
the following:

I) Whether or not Ordinance No. 02, series of 2008 or
the Gapan Public Market Code has become effective 30 days after it

-2-

was received by the Sanggunang Panlalawigan on 16 September
2008; and

2) Whether or not said Ordinance can now be
implemented by the City Mayor despite subsequent actions taken by
the Sangguniang Panlungsod, particularly that of withdrawing said
Ordinance from the Office of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan and
conducting proceedings to amend and/or repeal some provision
thereof

We deem it proper to answer your queries jointly since they pertain
to one subject matter.

In reply thereto, we find it imperative to make a distinction on the
terms “effectivity” and “validity” as mentioned and used under the
Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160). Please be informed that these
terms are not the same. They are two (2) different things.

Effectivity is the time by which an ordinance is made effective and
can already be implemented and given full force and effect. Effectivity is
governed by Section 59 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991, thus:

“SECTION 59. Effectivity of Ordinances or
Resolutions. -(a) Unless otherwise stated in the ordinance or
the resolution approving the local development plan and
public investment program, the same shall take effect after
ten (10) days from the date a copy thereof is posted in a
bulletin board at the entrance of the provincial capitol or city,
municipal, or barangay hall, as the case may be, and in at
least two (2) other conspicuous places in the local government
unit concerned.”

Based on Section 59(a) of the Local Government Code, an ordinance
of a local government unit or that of a Sangguniang Panlungsod in
particular, becomes effective as of the date the framers of such ordinance
would like it to be effective and in the absence of such effectivity clause,
the same shall take effect after ten (10) days from the date a copy thereof is
posted in a bulletin board at the entrance of the city hall and in at least two
(2) other conspicuous places in the local government unit concerned. With
respect to ordinances with penal sanctions, publication of the same in a
newspaper of general circulation within the province where the local
legislative body belongs is further required.

-3-

Ordinance No. 02, series of 2008 or the Market Code of Gapan has an
“Effectivity Clause” under Section 79 thereof which provides that “(Tjhis
Ordinance shall take effect upon its approval, fifteen (15) days after its
publication in a newspaper of local circulation.” Let it be noted, however,
that it is not clear therein on whose approval is being referred to.
Nonetheless, in the absence of any specific reference, it can be safely
presumed that the “approval” referred to under Section 79 of City Ordinance
No. 02, series of 2008 or the Market Code of Gapan is the approval by the
City Mayor of the enacted ordinance pursuant to Section 54 of the Local
Government Code.

Accordingly, upon your approval of City Ordinance No. 02, series of
2008 or the Market Code of Gapan and after compliance with the
publication requirement, said City Ordinance shall, as a matter of course,
be already given legal effect and implemented even if the same is still
pending review by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan. Thus, the withdrawal of
City Ordinance No. 02, series of 2008 or the Market Code of Gapan made by
Vice-Mayor Christian U. Tinio from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan will not,
in any way, affect the effectivity of said Ordinance. Such withdrawal can be
considered only as a mere mechanical act of withdrawing a copy of City
Ordinance No. 02, series of 2008 and did not operate to suspend the
effectivity of such legislative measure.

Validity, on the other hand, refers to the substantive requirement of
an ordinance, whether the same is consistent with the Constitution and
laws. When the Sangguniang Panlalawigan reviews City Ordinance No. 02,
series of 2008 or the Market Code of Gapan pursuant to Section 56 of the
Local Government of 1991, which we quote hereunder for easy reference:

“SECTION 56. Review of Component City and
Municipal Ordinances or Resolutions by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan. - (a) Within three (3) days after approval, the
secretary to the sanggunian panlungsod or sangguniang bayan
shall forward to the sangguniang panlalawigan for review,
copies of approved ordinances and the resolutions approving
the local development plans and public investment programs
formulated by the local development councils.

(b) Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of copies of
such ordinances and _ resolutions, the sangguniang
panlalawigan shall examine the documents or transmit them
to the provincial attorney, or if there be none, to the
provincial prosecutor for prompt examination. The provincial
attorney or provincial prosecutor shall, within a period of ten

-4-

(10) days from receipt of the documents, inform the
sangguniang panlalawigan in writing of his comments or
recommendations, which may be considered by the
sangguniang panlalawigan in making its decision.

(c) If the sangguniang panlalawigan finds that such an
ordinance or resolution is beyond the power conferred upon
the sangguniang panlungsod or sangguniang bayan concerned,
it shall declare such ordinance or resolution invalid in whole
or in part. The sangguniang panlalawigan shall enter its action
in the minutes and shall advise the corresponding city or
municipal authorities of the action it has taken.

(d) If no action has been taken by the sangguniang
panlalawigan within thirty (30) days after submission of such
an ordinance or resolution, the same shall be presumed
consistent with law and therefore valid.” (Emphasis Supplied)

the subject matter of the review dwells on the validity only of an ordinance,
and not to its effectivity. Please be reminded that, as discussed above,
pending review by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, the Ordinance under
review is already effective and can be given full force and effect upon ihe
arrival of the time provided for in the effectivity clause of the ordinance.

Along this line, may we stress that per the abovequoted Section 56
of the Local Government Code of 1991, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan is
required to take action on the ordinance on review within thirty (30) days
afier its submission. This Department had consistently opined that the
phrase “take action” should be construed as either approval or disapproval
of the ordinance and not just any other action of the reviewing sanggunian,
such as referral to a committee. After the lapse of such period, and no
official and/or formal document, such as a resolution which shall contain
the findings of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan on review of the
Sangguniang Panlungsod Ordinance, was issued by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan, it can be validly stated that the Sangguniang Panlalawigan
failed to act within thirty (30) days and the ordinance or resolution under
review can be presumed consistent with law and therefore valid.

Please be informed that this Department has consistently opined that
when a power is given, and that the power is to be exercised within a
prescriptive period, then such prescriptive period is considered a limitation
to such power. This is consistent with the principle that “where a statute
prescribed a time within which a public officer is to perform official acts
affecting the rights of others, it is directory as to the time, unless from
the nature of the act, the designation of time must be considered a

-5-

limitation on the power of the officer” (50 Am Jur, 23, p. 46, cited by
Alcantara, Samson in his book Statutes, 1990 Ed.)

Our interpretation as to the mandatory character of the 30-day period
to take action is also impelled by public policy. Sangguniang Panlungsod
Ordinances should attain stability at a given point in time. Otherwise, it
would render Sangguniang Panlungsod Ordinances unstable and may even
result to the subservience of the lower sanggunian to the higher
sanggunian considering that the latter can invalidate the ordinance on
review at any time it pleases and may even arbitrarily or whimsically
disapprove an ordinance which has already been implemented for quite a
long time. Moreover, ordinances are presumed valid until the contrary is
decreed by the reviewing authority or the courts.

Finally, may we respectfully point out that laws, including the subject
City Ordinance No. 02, series of 2008, are amended or repealed only by the
enactment of subsequent ones. They are not repealed, nor their violation
nor nonobservance excused by disuse or customs and practice to the
contrary. In the case of the City of Manila vs. Reyes (99 Phil 986 (1956)], the
Supreme Court held that the change in condition and circumstances after
the passage of a law, which necessitated the enactment of a statute to
overcome the difficulties brought about by such change does not operate
to repeal the prior law, nor make the latter statute so inconsistent with the
prior act as to repeal it.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

Ch Lh

AUSTERE A. PANADER
Undersecreta 7

Legal:20/17

