Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

April 9, 2008

MS. MARIVIC Q. GUERRERO
LGOO V, DILG
Asingan, Pangasinan

Dear Ms. Guerrero,

This is in response to your letter seeking our opinion on certain issues involving the Office of the Vice Mayor in your municipality.

As represented, Hon. Mila P. Antonio took her oath of office as the elected Vice Mayor of Asingan, Pangasinan on June 30, 2007. However, she did not report for work on July 2, 2007 apparently because of a standing warrant of her arrest due to certain Estafa cases filed against her and now pending before the courts of law.

On July 9, 2007, she filed a 10-day leave of absence covering the period from July 9, 2007 to July 20, 2007. As a consequence, the highest ranking SB Member, Hon. Heidie G. Chua, took her oath of office as Acting Vice Mayor. You now seek our opinion on the following issues:

1. Considering the status of the Vice Mayor, can she still avail of leave privileges?

2. In relation to No. 1, can the Vice Mayor renew her leave of absence every now and then? If yes, what is the maximum period of an elective official of leave privilege?

3. Is the Vice Mayor entitled to her salary and/or other benefits during her absence?

4. In relation to No. 3, is the Acting Vice Mayor entitled to her salary and/or benefits of a Vice Mayor?

5. If the Vice Mayor could not renew her leave of absence and continues to be AWOL, what would be the recourse of any taxpayer since the Vice Mayor could not possibly deliver the service needed by her constituents?

6. In case the position of a Vice Mayor is permanently vacated how do we fill the No. 8 position in the SB?


Vice Mayor Mila Antonio - Lakas-CMD
1st SB Member Heidie Chua - Puwersa ng Masa
2nd SB Member Artemio Gonzales - Lakas-CMD

7. Is it mandatory on the part of the SB to fill-up the vacancy in relation to No. 6?

Of recent, two separate letters from Mayor Carios P. Lopez, Sr. and Atty. Roseller A. Vira, were also received by this Department containing substantially the same issues enumerated above.

Anent your first question, we are of the view that the Vice Mayor is still entitled to the leave privileges of her office. Her being accused in several cases of Estafa does not automatically deprive her of the said benefit because, until and unless she is proven guilty thereof beyond reasonable doubt, via a conviction by final judgment, she continues to enjoy the presumption of innocence, and until sanctioned by law, she remains to be the Vice Mayor who is merely on leave of absence. Her entitlement to leave privileges is based on Section 81 of the Local Government Code of 1991 and CSC Memorandum Circular No. 41 Series of 1998, as amended by Memorandum Circular No. 14 series of 1999, Section 5, which reads:

"SECTION 5. Leave credits of local elective officials.

Local elective officials are entitled to leave privileges effective May 12, 1994, pursuant to Batas Pambansa 337 and the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160). Said leave credits shall be commutative and cumulative."

As to the reason for her leave, please be informed of the decision of the Supreme Court in Agustina M. Enemcio vs. Office of the Ombudsman, et. al., G.R. No. 146731, January 13, 2004, which ruled that "it matters not how the respondent utilizes the days wherein he is on leave, be they enjoyed as vacation, or in this case, incarceration for a crime." Accordingly, "(t)here appears to be no regulation or law against the utilizations of leave credits for purposes other than recreation."

Anent your second question, we are of the view that since the Vice Mayor is entitled to the leave privileges of her Office, she may maximize her availment thereof pursuant to law. However, as to the maximum period allowed by law, we may advise you to refer it to the Civil Service Commission, which is in the better position to enlighten you on the matter, said commission being the control personnel agency of the government.

Anent your third and fourth questions, we are of the view that she is not entitled to her salary during her absence based on "no work, no pay" principle. However, if she has leave credits, she can receive an amount equivalent to her salary during her absence charged to her leave credits, if any. On the other hand, acting Vice Mayor Chua is not entitled to the salary and benefits of the Office of the Vice Mayor. She is only occupying the Office in a temporary capacity by merely exercising the powers and performing the duties and functions thereof due to the temporary absence of the vice mayor. This finds basis in Section 46 of the Local Government Code, which reads:

"SECTION 46. Temporary Vacancy in the Office of the Local Chief Executive. (a) When the governor, city or municipal mayor, or punong barangay is temporarily incapacitated to perform his duties for physical or legal reasons such as, but not limited to leave of absence, travel