Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium tl Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
1.6 OPINION NO.© $, 2002
22 January 2009

MR. JORGE L. DURON, ET AL

Interim President

Barangay Captains Alumni Association, Inc.
lloilo City Chapter

Dear Mr. Duron, et al:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking for our legal opinion
on the following aforequoted queries, thus:

“L) Is an Ordinance enacted by the City Council of Manila
copy of which Is hereto attached under Ordinance No. 8702 dated
January 19, 2004 entitled “An Ordinance Conferring Distinguished
Public Service Award to Barangay Officials who have been elected
for three (3) consecutive terms after the passage of RA 7160,
otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991” legal or
iHegal?

2) Is there a law prohibiting the Local Government Unit
through its Sanggunian to enact an Ordinance Conferring a
Distinguished Public Service Award with monetary benefits within
their Area of Jurisdiction invoking the essence of Local Autonomy?”

Since your queries are interrelated, we shall answer them jointly.

At the outset, please be informed that this Department is bereft of
any authority to declare invalid or illegal any legislative measure passed by
local sanggunians such as Ordinance No. 8702, dated 19 January 2004
enacted by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of the City of Manila. Only courts
can make such declaration upon proper filing of an action for Declaratory
Relief in accordance with Rule 63 of the Revised Rules of Court.

Be that as it may, for purposes of academic discussion coupled with
our objective to guide you on the proper course of action to take under the
circumstances, we find the opinion of that City’s Legal Office, dated 20
October 2008, that Hoilo City, through the Sangguniang Panlungsod, may
enact an ordinance conferring a distinguished Public Service Award with
monetary benefits to barangay officials thereat who have been elected and
served for three (3) consecutive terms of office after the passage of the
Local Government Code of 1991, tenable.

Per your letter and its attachments, it is the contention of the
Regional Director of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM),

-2-

dated 21 October 2008, that the grant of cash rewards to barangay officials
is bereft of legal basis, as there is no specific provision of law granting
benefits to barangay officials for completing three consecutive terms. The
Regional Director articulated that Section 393 of the Local Government
Code of 1991 may not serve as the legal basis thereof considering that it
only delves with the entitlement of incumbent barangay officials of
emoluments as may be authorized by law or ordinance. With all due
respect to the opinion of the Regional Director of DBM, Section 393 of the
Code will indeed not truly serve as legal basis for the conferment of the
award and the grant of monetary benefits since the barangay officials
involved in the case at hand are no longer incumbents but those who have
served/completed three consecutive terms in office. Instead, we find the
power of the Sangguniang Panlungsod under Section 458 (a) of the Local
Government Code of 1991 to enact ordinances and appropriate funds for
the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of
this Code as a sufficient basis for the conferment of the award and grant of
the aforesaid monetary benefits. Let it be noted that general welfare or
public purpose is not unconstitutional merely because it incidentally
benefits a limited number of persons (Binay vs. Domingo G.R. No. 92389,
September 11, 1991; COA Decision No. 94-222 August 11, 1994), such as the
herein barangay officials who have been elected for three (3) consecutive
terms.

May we note however that while the Sangguniang Panlungsod may
enact an ordinance conferring a distinguished Public Service Award with
monetary benefits to the concerned barangay officials, the grant of said
monetary benefits to the concerned barangay officials shall still be subject
to the availability of funds of the City Treasury and in pursuant to an
Appropriation Ordinance to be enacted by the Sangguniang Pantungsod.
This is consistent with Section 305 (a) of the Local Government Code of
1991, which provides and we quote:

“SECTION 305. Fundamental Principles ~ The
financial affairs, transactions and operations of local
government units shall be governed by the following
principles:

{a) No money shall be paid out of the local
treasury except in pursuance of an appropriations
ordinance or law; xxx”

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. cretary fe

Undersecretary
Cc: Regional Director Evelyn A. Trompeta

DILG-Region VI

6 Parola St., tloilo City

Legal/17

