REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapag mahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

17 March 2008

MR. MICHAEL C. PEÑALOSA
Municipal Accountant
San Pedro, Laguna

Dear Mr. Peñalosa:

This pertains to your letter requesting for legal opinion.

You represented that Hon. Danilo M. Arceño was appointed by Hon. James
Marty Lim, then Liga National President, as Acting Liga President of the Liga ng
mga Barangay San Pedro Chapter in view of the vacancy created by the Liga
President and Vice President who were not anymore qualified for re-election
being last termers. Hon. Arceño then assumed office on 30 November 2007 until
15 December 2007 as Acting Liga President.

With that representation, you are now requesting our legal opinion on
whether or not Hon. Arceño is "entitled to collect
compensation/allowances for the services he rendered for the
period". We could just surmise that you are perhaps referring to the services of
the Acting Liga President rendered as ex-officio member of the Sangguniang
Bayan. According to you, the Sangguniang Bayan is of the view that there should
be a Resolution approving the appointment of Acting Liga President.

At the onset, may we clarify that the appointment made by Hon. James
Marty Lim, then Liga National President, in favor of Hon. Danilo Arceño as Acting
Liga President, was issued by the former based on the Liga Constitution and By
Laws. Such being the case and since the Liga was empowered by law to adopt its
own Constitution and By Laws, the appointment as Acting Liga President was
complete without need of any resolution from the Sangguniang Bayan approving
the same.

It is equally important to point out, however, that per the herein attached
Department Advisory dated 29 November 2007, the Department pronounced that
by operation of law, there is already vacancy in the ex-officio membership in the
different Sanggunians starting 29 October 2007 pursuant to the express mandate
of Section 3 of RA 9340, until such time the Liga Chapters at all levels could have
already elected their Liga presidents and other officers in an election conducted
under the supervision of this Department.

Consequently, we are of the view that Hon. Arceño, as Acting Liga
President from 30 November 2007 until 15 December 2007, is not anymore
entitled to collect compensation for the services rendered for that period as ex-
officio member of the Sangguniang Bayan since as of that point in time, all the ex-
officio membership in the Sangguniang were already declared vacant by this
Department. His appointment as Acting Liga President, for all legal intents and
purposes, will simply refer to his management of the daily affairs of the Liga ng
mga Barangay San Pedro Chapter until such time that the chapter could have
elected their new Liga President.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

cc: Director Roberto C. Abejero
DILG Regional Office No. IV-A
FTI Complex, Taguig City