Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

July 22, 2008

VICE-MAYOR ROWEL R. MUHI
Office of the Sangguniang Bayan
San Andres, Quezon

Dear Vice-Mayor Muhi:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion regarding the Memorandum dated March 24, 2008 issued by Municipal Mayor Sonia de Leon Emperese advising all Sangguniang Bayan Members to secure travel authority from her office before leaving the station and perform official trip outside the municipality in order to observe proper delegation of function within every agency/department within her jurisdiction.

In reply to your query, may we quote portion of DILG Opinion No. 20, series 2008 which was our reply to a similar query concerning the authority of the Municipal Mayor regarding the signing of travel order of the Sangguniang Bayan Members, officials and their employees as follows:

"If the Vice-Mayor's travel and/or that of the Members of the Sangguniang Bayan is chargeable to the general fund of the municipality, the approval of the Mayor is discretionary because under Section 444 (b)(1)(xv) of the Local Government Code of 1991, the Municipal Mayor, being the chief executive who exercise general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services and activities of the municipal government, is given the sole prerogative to authorize official trips outside of the municipality. This is part and parcel of the executive function of the municipal mayor.

On the other hand, if such travel is chargeable to the sangguniang funds, the recommendation of the Vice-Mayor is necessary and the approval of the Mayor becomes a ministerial function because under Section 445 (a) (i) of the same code, the Vice-Mayor is given the authority to sign all expenditures appropriated for the operation of the sangguniang bayan. The Sangguniang, through the Vice-Mayor, is actually acting as a legislative body of the local government unit (LGU) and operating on a separate budget though forming part of the entire budget of the municipality. As such, it becomes a duty on the part of the municipality mayor to authorize, including the issuance of corresponding travel order thereto to members of the sangguniang bayan and its employees whenever the vice-mayor had already issued his/her prior recommendation and had already signed the warrant drawn on the municipal treasury for all expenditures necessary for such official travel" (DILG Opinion No. 20, 2008 copy of which is hereto attached for easy reference).

In view of the foregoing, it is our considered view that the Memorandum issued by Mayor Sonia de Leon Emperese is in accordance with the law.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary