Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR PEACE AND ORDER
No. 27

16 March 2007

ATTY. VICTOR F. BERNABE, JR.
20 Robin Street, Franciville
Antipolo City

Dear Atty. Bernabe:

This has reference to your earlier letter requesting this Department's
assistance in the implementation of the following, to wit: (1) Sangguniang
Panlalawigan of Rizal Resolution No. 06-02, where on appeal, the said
Sangguniang Panlalawigan reduced the penalty of suspension from office
imposed by the Sangguniang Bayan of Baras upon your client, Kagawad
Violeta Gadayan, from 6 months to 3 months and further ordered her
return as the first-ranking Sangguniang Barangay Kagawad, and (2)
Resolution No. 06-159 of the same Sangguniang Panlalawigan denying the
Motion for Reconsideration filed by the Complainant-Appellee.

As borne by the records you submitted, and as complemented by
the verbal representation of Kagawad Gadayan during her visit to this
Department, Mr. Alfredo Ruba was the duly elected Punong Barangay of
Pinugay, Baras, Rizal. On the other hand, Ms. Gadayan was the first-ranking
Sangguniang Barangay Kagawad thereat.

Punong Barangay Ruba was administratively charged before the
Office of the Ombudsman and later found guilty as charged and
consequently ordered removed from office. Meantime, applying the rule on succession
under Section 44 (a) of the Local Government Code, first-ranking
sangguniang barangay kagawad Gadayan assumed the position of Punong
Barangay in a permanent capacity. During her incumbency as Punong
Barangay, the Pinugay Farmers Agro-Satellite Livelihood, Inc. (PFASLAI) filed
an administrative case against her before the Sangguniang Bayan of Baras,
Rizal. The Sangguniang Bayan later rendered a decision finding Punong
Barangay Gadayang guilty as charged and imposed upon her the penalty of
suspension from office for 6 months. Kagawad Gadayan then appealed the
Decision to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Rizal.

In relation to the pending appeal of former Punong Barangay Ruba,
the Court of Appeals reversed the decision of the Office of the
Ombudsman and ordered his reinstatement to his former position as
Punong Barangay. Meanwhile, with regard to the appeal of Ms. Gadayan,
from the Sangguniang Bayan of Baras decision meting upon her the
penalty of suspension for 6 months, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Rizal

Resolution No. 06-02 reducing her penalty from 6 months to 3
months and ordering further that she shall be paid the 3 months salary and
other emoluments in excess of the penalty meted against her during the
pendency of her appeal before the Sangguniang Panlalawigan and, finally,
the issue at hand, ordering her reinstatement as first-ranking Barangay Kagawad of Pinugay.

Complainant PFASLAI immediately filed a Motion for Reconsideration
contending that the issue of her administrative culpability has been
rendered moot and academic by the issue of whether or not with the
reassumption of Mr. Ruba as Punong Barangay by virtue of the Court of
Appeals decision, Kagawad Gadayang could still return to her Barangay
position to which she was duly elected. PFASLAI contended that
she cannot anymore return considering that when she assumed office as
Punong Barangay, she had effectively abandoned her Barangay Kagawad
position.

The Sangguniang Panlalawigan, in Resolution No. 06-159, denied the
Motion for Reconsideration filed by PFASLAI for lack of merit. At this point,
you likewise emphasized that Punong Barangay Ruba shared the same view
that complainant PFASLAI to the effect that having abandoned her
previous office as First Ranking Sangguniang Barangay Member, Ms.
Gadayang can no longer be reinstated as Barangay Kagawad. This is now the
subject matter of your letter, requesting this Department's assistance in
implementing Resolution Nos. 06-02 and 06-159 of the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan of Rizal, paving the way for your client's reassumption as first-
ranking Sangguniang Barangay Kagawad of Pinugay.

With respect to the request for this Department's assistance to
implement the Resolutions of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, please be
informed that the Sangguniang Panlalawigan performs dual functions,
namely: (1) legislative; and (2) quasi-judicial. The latter pertains to the
jurisdiction of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan to hear and decide
administrative cases against elective municipal officials and to take
effective action against erring elective barangay officials. In its quasi-judicial function, the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan can direct any agency of the government to implement its
orders and resolutions.

Along this line, may we note that the Sangguniang Panlalawigan did
not directly or, at the very least, requested this Department to implement
both Resolutions. Such being the case, the Department cannot implement
the subject Resolutions, lest it might be accused of unduly interfering with the
quasi-judicial functions of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan.

Be that as it may, it is significant to inform you that said Resolutions
the Sangguniang Panlalawigan are already implementable. We find
Section 66 of the Local Government Code instructive, which provides that:

"SEC. 66. Form and Notice of Decision..." (a) xxx Copies
of said decision shall immediately be furnished the
respondent and all interested parties xxx.