Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmalahat St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

JLC OPINION NO. 69 
22 August 2007

DIRECTOR LORETO T. BHAGWANI
DILG Regional Office No. 09
Zamboanga City

Dear Dir. Bhagwani:

This refers to your earlier Indorsement of the letter of Director Celestino D. Talpis, National Commission on Indigenous People, Regional Office No. 09, Zamboanga City, endorsing Mr. Timuay Anito L. Tilos as representative of the Indigenous People to the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Zamboanga City, for appropriate action or legal guidance/opinion.

In reply thereto, may we first lay down the provisions under RA 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code, in relation to RA 8371, otherwise known as "The Indigenous People’s Rights Act of 1997" with regard to the sectoral representations in all Sanggunians at all levels. To start with, Section 41 (b) and (c) of RA 7160 provides:

"(b) The regular members of the sangguniang panlalawigan, sangguniang panlungsod, and sangguniang bayan shall be elected by district, as may be provided for by law. Sangguniang barangay members shall be elected at large. The presidents of the leagues of sangguniang members of component cities and municipalities shall serve as ex-officio members of the sangguniang panlalawigan concerned. The presidents of the liga ng mga barangay and the pedersayon ng mga sangguniang kabataan elected by their respective chapters, as provided in this Code, shall serve as ex-officio members of the sangguniang panlalawigan, sangguniang panlungsod, and sangguniang bayan.

(c) In addition thereto, there shall be one (1) sectoral representative from the women, one (1) from the workers, and one (1) from any of the following sectors: the urban poor, indigenous cultural communities, disabled persons, or any other sector as may be determined by the sanggunian concerned within ninety (90) days prior to the holding of the next local elections, as may be provided for by law. The COMELEC shall promulgate the rules and regulations to effectively provide for the election of such sectoral representatives."

With respect to cities, Section 457 of the Local Government Code provides that:

"SEC. 457. Composition.- (a) The sangguniang panlungsod, the legislative body of the city, shall be composed of the city vice mayor as presiding officer, the regular sanggunian members, the president of the city chapter of the liga ng mga barangay, the president of the panlungsod na pedersayon ng mga sangguniang kabataan, and the sectoral representatives, as members.

(b) In addition thereto, there shall be three (3) sectoral representatives: one (1) from the women; and, as shall be determined by the sanggunian concerned within ninety (90) days prior to the holding of local elections, one (1) from the agricultural or industrial workers; and one (1) from the other sectors, including the urban poor, indigenous cultural minorities, or disabled persons.

(c) The regular members of the sangguniang panlungsod and the sectoral representatives shall be elected in the manner as may be provided for by law." (underlining ours)

Without first dwelling on RA 8371, which is a later law than the Local Government Code, it is clear that under Section 41 (b) of the Local Government Code, the Sanggunians, in addition to the regular and ex-officio members, shall be further composed of 3 sectoral representatives. It is noted that under said provision, the sectors for women and workers are already assured of one seat each. With respect to the other sectors, such as the urban poor, indigenous cultural communities, disabled persons or any other sector, the Sanggunian shall determine within ninety (90) days prior to the holding of the next local elections which sector from among the other sectors shall be represented in their respective Sanggunians.

Section 41 (b) of the Local Government Code has to be reconciled with Section 457 of the same Code with respect to the composition of the Sangguniang Panlungsod. As to the latter, again, it is provided that in addition to the regular and ex-officio members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, there shall be three (3) sectoral representatives in the Sangguniang. What is important to note in Section 457 of the Code is the fact that the women sector is assured of one (1) representation, and that with respect to the workers sector, the Sanggunian is given the option to determine as to whether the sectoral representative for the workers shall come from the agricultural or industrial workers sector.

With respect to the third sectoral representative, again, the Sanggunian is given the power to determine from which sector, including ...