Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. J__ S. 2005__
14 February 2005

VICE MAYOR ARMANDO S. TAN
Santiago City

Dear Vice Mayor Tan:

This refers to your request for reconsideration of DILG Opinion No. 112, s. 2004, addressed to Santiago City mayor Amelita S. Navarro.

For a better understanding, may we first restate verbatim the queries of Mayor Amelita S. Navarro, subject of our reply contained in DILG Opinion No. 112 dated 14 December 2004, to wit:

1. "Whether or not the Vice-Mayor has the sole authority to sign and approve disbursement vouchers for the expenditures for the operation of the sangguniang, including that of the Office of the Secretary of the Sangguniang; and

2. Whether or not the City Mayor appoints casual workers (e.g. street sweeper, garbage collector and the like)."

With respect to Query No. 2, may we likewise quote hereunder, our reply as contained in the aforesaid DILG Opinion.

"Anent the second issue, since your City Charter is silent on the matter, we have to apply the provisions of Section 77 of RA 7160 and Article 163 (d) of its Implementing Rules and Regulations, which provides that the Local Chief Executive is empowered to appoint those casual employees mentioned in your letter, without distinction as to where the employees shall be stationed."

In particular, you are now assailing our reply to Mayor Navarro's second query, invoking the following points:

1. That contrary to our statement that "the City Charter is silent on the matter", you emphatically pointed out that Section 9 (b) (2) of RA 7720 (City Charter) expressly provided that:

"(b) The vice mayor shall:"

- 2 -

(2) Subject to civil service law, rules and regulations, appoint all officials and employees of the sangguniang panlungsod, except those whose manner of appointment is specifically provided for by existing laws. xxx."

2. That said opinion is contrary to our previous Opinion No. 99, s. 2001, and CSC Resolution No. 000702 dated 15 March 2000, which resolved that "staff of the Vice Mayor and the staff of the sangguniang are one and the same". As such, only the Vice Mayor has the power to appoint the staff of both offices.

In reply thereto, we wish to thank you for raising the issue, thus giving us the opportunity to clarify further our position on the matter. It is not amiss to point out that a reading of your letter of reconsideration would lead us to your assertion that the power of the Vice Mayor to appoint all officials and employees of the Sangguniang Panlungsod would include the appointment of casual employees of that sangguniang.

Along this line, we find it imperative to clarify the term "casual employees" in a local government unit.

Casual employees admit of two kinds: (1) pursuant to a plantilla item as casual employees, e.g. casual employees under the plantilla of the sangguniang; and (2) casual employees hired through job orders for local projects authorized by the sangguniang without need of approval or attestation by the Civil Service Commission. The second kind of casual employees may refer to those casuals hired to address emergency or seasonal work in the local government unit concerned.

In relation to the second kind of casual employees, Section 77 of the Local Government Code is clear on the matter that said kind of casual employees are to be hired and employed by the Local Chief Executive, thus:

"SEC. 77. Responsibility for Human Resource and Development.- The chief executive of every local government unit shall be responsible for human resources and development in his unit and shall take all personnel actions in accordance with the Constitutional provisions on civil service, pertinent laws, and rules and regulations thereon, including such policies, guidelines and standards as the Civil Service Commission may establish: Provided, That the local chief executive may employ emergency or casual employees or laborers paid on a daily wage or piecework basis and hired through job orders for local projects authorized by the sangguniang concerned, without need of approval or attestation by the Civil Service Commission: Provided, further, That the period...