Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

DLLG OPINION NO. 30 S. 2007

21 March 2007

HON. MARIA LETICIA G. REYNA
Acting Director IV
Personnel Relations Office
Civil Service Commission
Constitution Hills, Batasan Complex
Diliman, Quezon City

Dear Director Reyna:

This pertains to your letter requesting from this Department the legal interpretation and applicability of Item (b) (1) (vi), Section 444 of RA 7160 otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991.

As gleaned from the letter, this query was prompted by the case now pending with that Honorable Commission involving the issue of registration with that Commission of the Collective Negotiation Agreement (CNA) entered into by and between the Municipality of Ailum as represented by Mayor Bangaoli and Ailum Municipal Employees Association (AMEA). The Sangguniang Bayan of that municipality assailed the representation and authority of Mayor Bangaoli in entering into said CNA with AMEA without its prior authority.

In reply thereto, may we restate Section 444 (b) (1) (vi) of RA 7160, to wit:

"SEC. 444. The Chief Executive: Powers, Duties, Functions and Compensation.- xxx (b) For efficient, effective and economical governance the purpose of which is the general welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code, the Municipal Mayor shall:

(1) Exercise general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services, and activities of the municipal government, and in this connection shall:

xxx xxx xxx

(vi) Upon authorization by the sangguniang bayan, represent the municipality in all its business transactions and sign on its behalf all bonds, contracts, and obligations, and such other documents made pursuant to law or ordinance. xxx"

Along this line, may we likewise restate Section 22 of the same Code, to wit:

"SEC. 22. Corporate Powers.- (a) Every local government unit, as a corporation, shall have the following powers:

xxx xxx xxx

(5) To enter into contracts; and

xxx xxx xxx

(c) Unless otherwise provided in this Code, no contract may be entered into by the local chief executive in behalf of the local government unit without prior authorization by the sangguniang concerned. A legible copy of such contract shall be posted at a conspicuous place in the provincial capitol or the city, municipal or barangay hall."

Having already cited above the pertinent provisions of law with respect to the power of the Municipal Mayor to enter into contract under Section 444 of the Code, may we hereunder restate also the pertinent provisions of the Local Government Code pertaining to the power of the city mayor and provincial governor to enter into contracts.

With respect to the City Mayor, Section 455 (b) (1) (vi) of the Code provides, to wit:

"SEC. 455. Chief Executive: Powers, Duties and Compensation.- xxx (b) For efficient, effective and economical governance the purpose of which is the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code, the city mayor shall:

(1) Exercise general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services, and activities of the city government, and in this connection, shall:

xxx xxx xxx

(vi) Represent the city in all its business transactions and sign in its behalf all bonds, contracts, and obligations, and such other documents upon authority of the sangguniang panlungsod or pursuant to law or ordinance."

As to the Governor, Section 465 (b) (1) (vi) of the Code provides:

"SEC. 465. Chief Executive: Powers, Duties and Compensation.- xxx (b) For efficient, effective and economical governance the purpose of which is the general welfare of the province and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code, the city mayor shall:

(1) Exercise general supervision and control over all programs, projects, services, and activities of the provincial government, and in this connection, shall: