REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Edsa Cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

30  
S. 2009
26 June 2009

HON. COUNCILOR FROILAN C. MANIBO
Office of the Sanggunian Panlungsod
Calapan City

Dear Councilor Manibo:

This pertains to your request for legal opinion on the application of
Golden Isle Development Corporation for the approval of their proposed
Golden Isle Shrine Memorial Garden at Barangay Bulusan, Calapan City
which per your letter is now pending before the Joint Committee on
Housing and Land Use and the Committee on Laws of your August Body.

As borne out by your communication1, the application of Golden
Isle, when submitted to the sanggunian, was accompanied by the
required documents, clearances and permits including the needed
Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) from the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources. Such application, however, was
opposed by the newly elected barangay officials of Barangay Bulusan on
the ground that their respective signatures as appearing on Barangay
Resolution No. 30-03 dated 10 August 2003 of that barangay were
falsified. The oppositors even chided the issue of social acceptability by
Barangay Bulusan of the proposed memorial park, as this will be
detrimental to the health and safety of the residents.

Given the foregoing backdrop, it is the stand of this Department
that the Sanggunian Panlungsod of Calapan City should now act on
the afore-stated request of Golden Isle Development Corporation. We
wish to emphasize at the outset, that notwithstanding the opposition of
the newly elected barangay officials of Bulusan, the fact that Golden Isle
has already obtained an ECC from DENR on the basis of a previous
barangay resolution now being contested by the present barangay
leadership is already an indication that the corporation has already
complied with the needed requirements in their application. The
corporation has acquired a vested right thereto upon the grant of their
ECC and not even the vigorous opposition of the new set of barangay
officials hiding sanctuary on the issue of their signatures falsified cannot
defeat such right. Besides, it is axiomatic in law that the new set of
barangay officials are always bound by the legal acts of their
predecessors. If they desire to take exception thereto, their remedy is
either go to court and seek an injunctive relief that will stay the efficacy
of the ECC, or to ask DENR to revoke the ECC issued based on plausible
grounds that will intrinsically assail its validity.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary for Local Government

LS: 44/e/lern