Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Magapmaharl St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 13 S. 2005
February 11, 2005

VICE MAYOR LUIS C. FAVORITO
Taysan, Batangas

Dear Vice Mayor Favorito:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion anent the letter of
Mayor Anacorita P. Portugal to all the members of the Sangguniang Bayan of that
municipality denouncing the private employment with Fortune Cement
Corporation of SB Member Edilberto Abaday.

In reply thereto, please be informed that Section 90 (b) of the Local
Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) provides that "Sangguniang members may
practice their professions, engage in any occupation, or teach in schools except
during session hours. xxx"

From the foregoing, it is clear that sangguniang bayan members are
allowed to engage in any occupation, provided it is done during hours when no
session is being conducted. In addition, although they are allowed to do so under
Section 90 (b) of the Local Government Code, Section 7 of RA 6713 otherwise
known as the Code of Ethical Standards for Government Officials and Employees,
must still be considered.

"SECTION 7 - PROHIBITED ACTS AND TRANSACTIONS -
xxx (b) Outside employment and other activities related thereto-
Public officials and employees during their incumbency shall not:

1) own, control, manage, or accept
employment as officer, employee, consultant, counsel,
broker, agent, trustee, or nominee in any private
enterprise regulated, supervised or licensed by their
office unless expressly allowed by law;

2) engage in the practice of their profession
unless authorized by the constitution or law, provided
that such practice will not conflict or tend to conflict
with their official functions; or

3) recommend any person to any position in a
private enterprise which has a regular or pending
official transaction with their office.

The prohibitions shall continue to apply for a period of one
year after resignation, retirement, or separation from public office,
except in the case of subparagraph (b) (2) above, but the
professional concerned cannot practice his profession in connection
with any matter before the office he used to be with, in which case
the one year prohibition shall likewise apply."

Accordingly, elective local officials are allowed to engage in private
undertakings provided that they will comply with the requirements under Section
90 of the Code and that such engagement will not constitute a violation of
Section 7 of RA 6713.

May it be noted further that while it is true that public official can be
allowed to engage in private employment, they are not however allowed to
engage in public employment in view of the express prohibition under Section 94
of RA 7160, which states that:

"Section 94 (a) - No elective or appointive local officials shall
be eligible for appointment or designation in any capacity to any
public office or position during his tenure.

Unless otherwise allowed by law or by the primary functions
of his position, no elective or appointive local official shall hold any
other office or employment in the government or any subdivision,
agency or instrumentality thereof, including government-owned or
controlled corporation or their subsidiaries."

In this regard, we are of the view that there is no legal impediment for
Sangguniang Bayan Member Abaday’s employment at Fortune Cement
Corporation as long as it does not affect his attendance during session days or
violate the conflict-of-interest rule as said employment is a private one. What is
prohibited under Section 94 (a) is the employment of either an elective or
appointive official in a public office, including GOCCs and its subsidiaries.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGELO T. REYES
Secretary

legal:94-cz/cga
cc: Dir. Leonilo B. Larios
DILG Region IV-A