REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magpabali St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

ATTV. JIMMY D. LACEBAL
Sangguniang Panlungsod Secretary
OIC - Legal Department
City Hall, Mandaluyong City

Dear Atty. Lacebal:

This refers to your request for this Department's opinion on the issues stated hereunder, to wit:

1. "Can the qualified and appointed City Legal Officer be authorized to engage in the private practice of law as long as it is not in conflict with the interests of the City Government?

2. If other position below the City Legal Officer level are filled up pursuant to the Organizational plantilla, can they too be authorized to engage in the limited practice of law?

3. If appointed as Legal Consultants and draw their salaries at the Legal Department budget, can they represent the City Government in the prosecution and defense of the City Government?"

Questions nos. 1 and 2 are answered in the affirmative.

Please be informed that in CSC Resolution No. 93-2203 dated 21 June 1993, the Civil Service Commission has in effect resolved that lawyers in the government service are allowed to engage in the private practice of their profession upon prior authority from the head of the agency under which he is appointed. "Head of Agency" in your case would be your City Mayor, Hon. Benjamin C. Abalos, Jr.

Although the aforesaid CSC Resolution did not set the conditions under which the authority to engage in the private practice of law may be granted, it is understood that the limitation and restrictions set forth under the Conflict of Interest rule found under RA 6713, entitled: "An Act Establishing a Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees", and its implementing Rules and Regulations, shall always be observed. Normally, such authority to practice law is granted on the condition that his duty as a public servant must not be prejudiced. Thus, in case of conflict of schedule, his duty as a public servant always takes precedence.

As regards your third query, let it be stated at the outset that consultancy services are classified as non-government services and one where no employer-employee relationship exists, per Section 2 (a), Rule XI, Civil Service Commission Memorandum Circular No. 4, s. 1998. In contemplation to the definition given, a legal consultant, therefore, is technically a private lawyer.

Along this line, please be informed that the Supreme Court, in the case of Ramos vs. Court of Appeals (108 SCRA 728) ruled that: "a private lawyer cannot represent a local government unit even if the services rendered were gratis, and stated that a municipality should not be burdened with expenses of hiring a private lawyer and that the interests of the municipality would be best protected if a government lawyer handles its litigations". Such ruling equally applies in the case of cities.

However, by way of exception, the Supreme Court, in the case of Mancenido, et al. vs. Court of Appeals (370 SCRA 419) stated the following instances, to wit:

1. "Only when the provincial fiscal is disqualified may the municipal counsel be authorized to hire the services of a private attorney.

2. The municipal public prosecutor is disqualified from representing a particular municipality (a) when the jurisdiction of a case involving the municipality lies with the Supreme Court; (b) when the municipality is a party adverse to the provincial government or to some other municipalities in the same province; and (c) when in a case involving the municipality, the provincial prosecutor, his spouse, or his child is involved as a creditor, heir, legatee or otherwise.