REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG OMNION NO. 28 S. 2 0 0 7

HON. DANIEL D.L. HERNANDEZ
HON. JOSE S.J. GARCIA, JR.
HON. ROSA GLENN T. GONGORA
HON. RIZFORD CARLO C. PALOMARIA
Sangguniang Bayan Members

13 March 2007

This pertains to your letter requesting for legal opinion on the following issues and we quote:

Whether or not the relief of the Secretary of the Sangguniang Bayan, at the behest of the Presiding Officer and without consultations with the members of the whole, is tantamount to LACK OF DUE PROCESS;

Whether or not the relief of the Secretary of the Sangguniang Bayan, at the behest of the Presiding Officer and without consultations with the members of the whole, likewise tantamount to CONSTRUCTIVE DISMISSAL;

Whether or not the act of the minority members of the Sangguniang Bayan declaring the majority members, who walked out or have withdrawn their attendance from the said session, to have "ABSTAINED FROM VOTATION" it being apparent that the said walking out or withdrawal of attendance was in strong opposition to the undue relief of the Sangguniang Secretary, Ms. Norma I. Cuevas;

Whether or not the SB Resolution Nos. 2007-001, 2007-002; and SB Ordinance Nos. 2007-001, 2007-002 lacked the necessary approval of the majority of the members of the Sangguniang Bayan as per Section 37, Majority Requirements of the Internal Rules of Procedure.

Your queries were prompted by the incident last 15 January 2007 where regular session of the Sangguniang Bayan of that municipality, you were prompted to find out that your Sangguniang Secretary, Ms. Norma I. Cuevas, through Office Memorandum dated 12 January 2007, was officially relieved from the performance of the duties and responsibilities as Secretary to the Sangguniang, effective 12 January 2007. She was likewise directed to temporarily turnover all records and/or other pertinent documents of the Sangguniang to Ms. Maria Nathalie B. Tizon, Administrative Officer V, to act as the Interim Secretary to Sangguniang. Finally, she was directed to report directly to the Office of the Vice Mayor after the turnover of records and/or documents.

During the 15 January 2007 session and after quorum has been established, you manifested together with the other Members of the Sangguniang Bayan, your strong opposition to the undue relief of the Sangguniang Bayan Secretary and without consultations with the Members of the whole and without the due process. When it went apparent that your opposition will not be recognized by the Presiding Officer, you withdrew your attendance in the said session as reflected in the official opinion of higher authorities regarding the matter, after which, you walked out from the session, despite the lack of quorum and despite the unresolved issue; the Presiding Officer, after calling a recess continued with the four (4) members remaining and continued the session by declaring that members who abstained from votation and thereafter, passed two resolutions and two (2) ordinances. Hence, your above-quoted queries.

In reply to your first query, please be informed of CSC Resolution No. 92-92 where the Civil Service Commission, in interpreting the proper appointment of secretary to the Sangguniang Bayan, declared that not being a Department head, she was merely given a task equivalent thereto, the Secretary to the Municipality shall be appointed by the Vice Mayor as provided for under Section 445 of the Local Government Code.

I do not wish to point out in this regard that CSC Resolution No. 92-1111 and Section 445 of the Local Government Code do not require, as a condition precedent, consultation with the other members of the Sangguniang Bayan.
Such being the case, we are of the view that consultation with the members of the whole is not also required when the Vice Mayor exercises his power to relieve the Secretary to the Sangguniang Bayan as this is also an exercise of his power to appoint. At this point, it bears to stress that we are not at this point to adjudicate as to whether or not the relief made by the Vice Mayor was in accordance with law and civil service rules as this might preempt any action that must be taken or is to be filed before the Commission.