REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagkahat St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

MILO OPINION NO. 39, S. 2005
03 August 2005

MS. LORENA NATIVIDAD-BORJA
Sangguniang Panlungsod Member
Valenzuela City

Dear SP Member Borja:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the scope of
the authority of the Committee on Ethics, Good Government and Public
Accountability of that sanggunian regarding matters involving disciplinary
cases against appointive barangay officials.

In reply thereto, please allow us to restate the pertinent provisions of
the Local Government Code related to your query, to wit:

"SEC. 61. Form and Filing of Administrative Complaints.- A
verified complaint against any erring local elective official shall be
prepared as follows:

xxx xxx xxx

(c) A complaint against any elective barangay official shall
be filed before the sangguniang panlungsod or sangguniang bayan
concerned whose decision shall be final and executory." (underlining
ours)

"SEC. 87. Disciplinary Jurisdiction.- Except as otherwise provided
by law, the local chief executive may impose the penalty of removal
from service, demotion in rank, suspension for not more than one (1)
year without pay, fine in an amount not exceeding six (6) months'
salary, or reprimand and otherwise discipline subordinate officials and
employees under his jurisdiction. If the penalty imposed is suspension
without pay for not more than thirty (30) days, his decision shall be final.
If the penalty imposed is heavier than suspension of thirty (30) days, the
decision shall be appealable to the Civil Service Commission, which shall
decide the appeal within thirty (30) days from receipt thereof."

From the foregoing, it is crystal clear that the disciplinary authority of
the Sangguniang Panlungsod over barangay officials extends only to
elective barangay officials. The Sangguniang Panlungsod can only exercise
that power which is expressly conferred by law or necessarily implied
therefrom.

Accordingly, since the disciplinary jurisdiction vested unto the
Sangguniang Panlungsod pertains only to elective barangay officials, then,
it cannot exercise disciplinary authority over appointive barangay officials,
such as barangay treasurer, barangay secretary, tanods, etc.

An administrative case against an appointive barangay official is
governed by another section of the same Code, which is Section 87 as
aforequoted.

In a barangay, the Local Chief Executive is the Punong Barangay.
Therefore, based on Section 87 of the Local Government Code and the
supplementary application of the Civil Service laws, the Punong Barangay is the
disciplinary authority over appointive barangay officials, such as barangay
treasurers, barangay secretaries, barangay tanods, etc.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

MELCHOR P. ROSALES
Acting Secretary

Legal:28:68:43/La

copy furnished:

Director Rodolfo S. Feraren
DILG-NCR
LMP Building, Ermin Garcia St.
Cubao, Quezon City