REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Edsa Cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

MAYOR ERIC C. CODILLA
Ormoc City, Leyte

Dear Sir:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on whether or not you can issue a mayor's permit to your businesses. You stated in your letter that your businesses consist of civil works contractor and chicken dressing plant all located within the city of your jurisdiction, all established long before you became the Mayor of Ormoc City. You further alleged that these businesses all have the corresponding business permits, never had any business transaction with the local government of Ormoc City, and are the bread and butter of your family.

This issue was raised because when this was brought before the Assistant Deputy Ombudsman in the Visayas, you were told to "divest all these businesses just to follow the law."

In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to the following provisions of law:

Section 3(h) of Republic Act No. 3019 (Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act) makes a public officer criminally liable for -

"(h) directly or indirectly having financial or pecuniary interest in any business contract or transaction in connection with which he intervenes or takes part in his official capacity, or in which he is prohibited by the Constitution or by any law from having any interest ."

From the abovecited provision, it is evident that the above provision is violated when a public officer has financial or pecuniary interest in any business contract or transaction in connection with which he intervenes or takes part in his official capacity, and he is prohibited by the Constitution or by law from having any interest therein.

A reading of the aforecited provision of law also reveals that the prohibited act refers to a "transaction" in which one has any financial or pecuniary interest. It can then be inferred, from this that the issuance of a mayor's permit is not a transaction deemed covered by the prohibition and does not fall within the ambit of the abovecited provision of law. It applies only to those transactions wherein there exists a financial or material gain by virtue of the public officer's actual intervention on the matter. Furthermore, the term "transaction" usually connotes the carrying on of business negotiations whereby a cause of action or alteration of legal rights occur. Please note that while it is true that the Office of the Mayor issues licenses and permits and has the power to revoke the same for any violation of the conditions upon which said licenses or permits have been issued pursuant to a law or ordinance, (Section 455 (b)(3)(iv) of the Local Government Code), the issuance thereof depends on whether or not all the requirements set forth by law or ordinance for its issuance are met/submitted. And once all such requirements are met, the approval thereof by the mayor becomes purely ministerial, not discretionary. The power to issue Mayor's Permit/License is an administrative function of the Mayor attached to the office and not a business contract or transaction.

This conclusion is supported by the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Chinese Flour Importers Union vs. Price Stabilization Board, (89 Phil. 839) which ruled to the effect that the Mayor should be guided by law or ordinance in the issuance of a license or permit, absence of which could result in uncontrolled power as it rests in the Mayor an arbitrary discretion, without a policy, rule or standard for which it can be measured on controlled.

Hence, for as long as your civil works contractor and chicken dressing plant businesses meet all the requirements for the issuance of a business permit, a Mayor's Permit must be issued. This is because while the power to issue licenses/permits may involve legal discretion, the eventual issuance thereof becomes a ministerial duty on the part of the issuing public officer or the mayor. The fact, therefore, that you are also the issuing authority is merely incidental.

As to the issue of divestment, Republic Act No. 6713 (AN ACT ESTABLISHING A CODE OF CONDUCT AND ETHICAL STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES), relatedly provides as follows:

Section 9. DIVESTMENT - A public official or employee shall avoid conflicts of interest at all times. When a conflict of interest arises, he shall resign from his position in any private business enterprise within thirty (30) days from his assumption of office and or divest himself of his shareholdings or interest within sixty (60) days from such assumption.

The same rule shall apply when the public official or employee is a partner in a partnership.

Simply put, "divestment" is the transfer of title or disposal of interest in property by voluntarily, compulsory and actually depriving or dispossessing oneself of his right or title to it in favor of a person or persons other than his spouse and relatives as defined in this Act (Section 3[1]).

It is therefore clear from the aforecited provision that divestment is proper only in case a conflict of interest exists. And conflict of interest "arises when a public official or employee is a member of a board, an officer, or a substantial stockholder of a private corporation or owner or has a substantial interest in a business, and the interest of such corporation or business, or his rights or duties therein may be opposed to or affected by the faithful performance of official duty." (Section 3(i), RA 6713)