Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapaghamal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

16 February 2006

VICE MAYOR ARMANDO S. TAN
Santiago City

Dear Vice Mayor Tan:

This pertains to your letter seeking legal opinion on the following issues, to wit:

1. "Is the office of the vice mayor vacant if he will only be an acting city mayor?

2. Does the vice mayor necessarily relinquish or abandon his title as vice mayor if he will be designated as the acting city mayor?

3. Is the mayor empowered or has the authority to designate an acting city vice mayor?

4. If there is a temporary vacancy in the office of the city mayor, does it follow that there is likewise temporary vacancy in the office of the city vice mayor when the latter has assumed as acting city mayor?

5. Does Section 49 (Succession-Permanent Vacancy) of the Local Government Code apply in case of temporary vacancy and how would this Section 49 be reconciled with Section 46 (Temporary Vacancy) of the same Code?

6. Will the highest ranking member of the Sangguniang Panlungsod likewise assume as acting city vice mayor?

7. Can the vice mayor who is acting city mayor preside over a session of the sanggunian and still assume his powers, duties and functions of his office?

8. When is the right time that the city mayor should inform the city vice mayor or the sangguniang panlungsod of her leave of absence?

9. Can the regional director of this agency give a valid or legal opinion?"

In replying, since your queries numbered one to seven are inter-related with each other, we deem it more appropriate to consolidate our answers thereto.

Thus, we would like to invite your attention to Section 9 of RA 7720, otherwise known as "An Act Converting the Municipality of Santiago into an Independent Component City to be known as the City of Santiago", which provides that:

"SEC. 9. The City Vice Mayor.- xxx (b) The Vice Mayor shall:

xxx xxx xxx

3. Assume the Office of the City Mayor for the unexpired term of the latter in the event of permanent vacancy;

4. Exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions of the City Mayor in cases of temporary vacancy; xxx." (Underlining ours)

In relation thereto, Section 23 of the same Act provides that:

"SEC. 23. Temporary Vacancy in the Office of the City Mayor.- (a) When the city mayor is temporarily incapacitated to perform his duties for physical or legal reasons such as, but not limited to, leave of absence, travel abroad and suspension from office, the city vice mayor xxx shall automatically exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions of the city mayor, except the power to appoint suspend or dismiss employees which can only be exercised if the period of temporary incapacity exceed thirty (30) working days." (Underlining ours)

It bears to note that the law used two (2) different words, namely: "assume" for permanent vacancy, and "exercise" for temporary vacancy. There is a marked distinction between the two. "Assume" has been defined as "put oneself in place of another as to an obligation", while "exercise" has been defined as "to make use; thus, to exercise a power is to do something which it enables the holder to do" (Black's Law Dictionary). Hence, it is noted that if a temporary vacancy occurs in the Office of the City Mayor, the mandate of the law is for the Vice Mayor to "exercise the powers and perform the duties" and "not assume the office" of the City Mayor. In this situation, it does not involve the relinquishment or abandonment by the Vice Mayor of his position as such he is merely performing the duties and functions of the City Mayor in a temporary nature due to the temporary incapacity of the City Mayor to meantime discharge the functions and duties of the office. However, the City Vice Mayor cannot simultaneously perform the functions and duties in both offices of the City Mayor and that of the Vice Mayor as this would violate the basic principle of separation of powers. This principle simply means that, except as allowed by law or the Constitution, executive functions, on the one hand, and legislative functions, on the other, cannot be made to encroach with each other. Thus, the executive officer cannot encroach into the legislative functions of the sanggunian, neither can the legislative officer encroach into the functions of the executive office.