Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagkamahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City
January 29, 2007

MARIA J. NAYPES
TERESITA J. NAYPES
8881 Sampaloc Avenue
Barangay San Antonio Village
Makati City

Dear Mesdames:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our opinion on whether or not you can now secure a barangay clearance and ask the City Government of Makati to lift its earlier Desistance/Closure Order against your junkshop in view of the dismissal by the City Prosecution Office of the criminal charge against you for operating the junkshop despite a closure order and refusal to obey a lawful order under Article 151 of the Revised Penal Code, as well as by the Metropolitan Trial Court (Branch 63) of the City of Makati for the charge of Violation of Chapter VII, Section 16 of City Ordinance No. 2003-095 (Anti-Littering).

We regret to inform you that the dismissal of the criminal cases against you will not result to the lifting of the Desistance/Closure Order issued by the City Government of Makati.

Please take note that the Order of Desistance/Closure issued by the City Government of Makati against your junkshop was premised on your alleged failure to get the required business permits from the City. Thereafter, for allegedly operating your junkshop despite said Order of Desistance/Closure, the City Government of Makati filed against you a criminal case for operating a business despite a closure order and refusal to obey a lawful order under Article 151 of the Revised Penal Code at the City Prosecution Office and before the Metropolitan Trial Court (Branch 63) of the City of Makati for your alleged violation of Chapter VII, Section 16 of City Ordinance No. 2003-095 (Anti-Littering) which were however dismissed for lack of evidence and prescription, respectively. At this point, it bears to stress that the dismissal of the criminal case will only exonerate you from your criminal liability on the acts complained of but will not operate to excuse you from securing the necessary business permits from the City for you to be lawfully allowed to engage and operate your business thereof. The requirement of Business Permits and the criminal cases filed against you are two different things. In the meantime, it would be advisable for you to follow-up your pending application for Business Permits and should you believe that the refusal by the City to issue the necessary business permits is wanting of any legal or factual basis, you may seek the aid of the court by filing the appropriate civil case to compel the City to issue the Business Permits.

With regard to your query on barangay clearance, may we invite your attention to Section 152 (c) of Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) which provides that:

"SEC. 152. Scope of Taxing Powers. - The barangay may levy taxes, fees, and charges, as provided in this Article, which shall exclusively accrue xxx.

(c) Barangay Clearance. - No city or municipality may issue any license or permit for any business or activity unless a clearance is first obtained from the barangay where such business or activity is located or conducted. For such clearance, the sangguniang barangay may impose a reasonable fee. The application for clearance shall be acted upon within seven (7) working days from the filing thereof. In the event that the clearance is not issued within the said period, the city or municipality may issue the said license or permit. xxx."

Prescending from the foregoing, it is clear therefore that a barangay clearance is only one of the several requirements in securing a business permit from the City. The business clearance alone cannot legalize your operation of business if, in the meantime, you have no Business Permits from the City.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

WENCELITO T. ANDANAR
Undersecretary

Legal: 17/La