Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

14 January 2009

VICE-MAYOR LAZARO S. DEL RIO
Kalayaan, Palawan

Dear Vice-Mayor del Rio:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our legal opinion on whether or not the elected Punong Barangay in the lone barangay in that municipality automatically becomes the Liga President absent any election of the Liga as there is no Liga to speak of in the first place there being only one barangay.

In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to Sections 491, 492 and 494 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), to wit:

"SECTION 491. Purpose of Organization. - There shall be an organization of all Barangays, to be known as the liga ng mga Barangay, for the primary purpose of determining the representation of the Liga in the sanggunians and for ventilating, articulating and crystallizing issues affecting barangay government administration and securing, though proper and legal means, solutions thereto." (Emphasis Supplied)

"SECTION 492. Representation, Chapters, National Liga. - Every barangay shall be represented in said liga by the punong barangay or, in his absence or incapacity, by a sangguniang member duly elected for the purpose among its members, who shall attend all meetings or deliberations called by the different chapters of the liga.

The liga shall have chapters at the municipal, city, provincial and metropolitan political subdivision levels.

The municipal and city chapters of the liga shall be composed of the barangay representatives of municipal and city barangays, respectively. The duly elected presidents if component cities and municipalities shall constitute the provincial chapter or the metropolitan political subdivision chapter. The duly elected presidents of highly-urbanized cities, provincial chapters, the Metropolitan Manila chapter and metropolitan political subdivision chapters shall constitute the National Liga ng mga Barangay."

"SECTION 494. Ex-Officio Membership in Sanggunian. - The duly elected presidents of the liga at the municipal, city, and provincial levels, including the component cities and municipalities of Metropolitan Manila, shall serve as ex-officio members of the sangguniang bayan, sangguniang panlungsod, sangguniang bayan, respectively. They shall serve as such only during their term of office as presidents of the liga chapters, which in no case shall be beyond the term of office of the sangguniang concerned." (Emphasis Supplied)

Based on the foregoing and as indicated by the term itself, the "Liga ng mga Barangay" is an organization of all barangays. The member-barangays within a municipality shall be represented therein by their Punong Barangays who shall organize themselves and elect from among them the President and other officers of liga at the municipal level as provided in the National Liga Constitution and By-Laws. The elected President of the liga at the municipal level shall concurrently serve as ex-officio member of the sangguniang bayan.

As an organization, the Liga ng mga Barangay in a municipality presupposes a plurality of barangays thereat. In your case, having a lone barangay in the municipality, in effect, renders this plurality and the process of election of the President and other officers of the liga in that municipality practically impossible. However, considering that the primary purpose of organizing the Liga ng mga Barangay is to represent the barangays in the sangguniang bayan and at the same time, to serve as medium for ventilating, articulating and crystallizing issues affecting barangay government administration and securing, through proper and legal means, solutions thereto, we are of the considered view that the lone Punong Barangay can legally be considered as the automatic President of the Liga at the municipal level and therefore, per Section 446 (a) of the Local Government Code of 1991, should concurrently serve as an ex-officio member of the sangguniang bayan. The reason for this is the fact that there is still one barangay left which needs to be represented in the sangguniang bayan and which governance may still be confronted with issues that must be ventilated, articulated and crystallized consistent with.