Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmalhal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

28 August 2008

MAYOR FAUSTINO A. SILANG
Tayabas City, Quezon

Dear Sir:

This has reference to your letter addressed to Her Excellency,
President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, which was in turn referred to this
Department for appropriate action by the Office of the President,
requesting for legal opinion on the following quoted queries:

1. "Whether or not the composition of the regular
sangguniang members (sic) of the Sangguniang
Panlungsod of Tayabas should be limited to eight (8).

2. Whether or not the appointments of the two (2)
additional regular members of the Sangguniang
Panlungsod of Tayabas are in accordance with the
law."

As borne by the records, on 18 March 2007, RA 9398, entitled: "An
Act Converting the Municipality of Tayabas in the Province of
Quezon into a Component City to be known as the City of Tayabas",
was enacted. The conversion of the Municipality of Tayabas was ratified in
a plebiscite conducted on 14 July 2007 where the majority of the votes cast
ratified the conversion. Such ratification under Section 10 of the Local
Government Code would signal the commencement of the corporate
existence of the City of Tayabas.

May we note that after the passage of RA 9398, but before the
plebiscite was conducted, a synchronized national and local election was
held on 14 May 2007. Understandably, not having been ratified yet, the City
of Tayabas was still then considered as a municipality, hence, in the said
local elections, there were only eight (8) regular members of the
Sangguniang Bayan up for election. After the plebiscite, two (2) additional
regular members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Tayabas were
appointed by the President to complete the ten (10) membership of the said
Sangguniang.

In relation now to your first query, you intimated that the reply
thereto must be in the affirmative. In support thereof, you cited Section 10
of the Charter of Tayabas City (RA 9398) where it is provided that:

"SEC. 10. Composition.- The sangguniang panlungsod, the
legislative body of the City, shall be composed of the city vice
mayor as the presiding officer, the regular sangguniang members, the
president of the city chapter of the liga ng mga barangay,
the president of the panlungsod na pederasyon ng mga sangguniang
kabataan and the sectoral representatives, as members."

You compared this provision with the Charter of Santa Rosa City (RA 9264),
particularly Section 10 thereof, which says:

"SEC. 10. The Sangguniang Panlungsod.- The sangguniang
panlungsod, the legislative body of the City, shall be composed of
the city vice mayor as presiding officer, ten (10) regular sangguniang
members, the president of the city chapter of the liga ng mga
barangay, the president of the panlungsod na pederasyon ng mga
sangguniang kabataan and the sectoral representatives, as
members."

You emphasized that the City Charter of Tayabas did not fix the number of
the regular Sanggunian members and for this, you concluded that the eight
(8) regular members of the Sangguniang Bayan elected in the 14 May 2007
elections shall comprise the regular members of the Sangguniang
Panlungsod of Tayabas in accordance with Section 53 of the City Charter
of Tayabas, which provides and we quote:

"SEC. 53. Officials of the City of Tayabas.- The present
elective officials of the Municipality of Tayabas shall continue to
exercise their powers and functions until such time that a new
election is held and the duly elected officials shall have already
qualified and assumed their offices. The appointive officials and
employees of the City shall likewise continue exercising their
functions and duties and they shall automatically (be) absorbed by
the City Government of the City of Tayabas."