Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
B. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

10 July 2007

MS. ANNIE S. DE LEON
Human Resource Management, Officer IV
Office of the Municipal Mayor
Imus, Cavite

Dear Ms. De Leon:

This has reference to your earlier letter asking our opinion on the entitlement of back wages of Mayor Oscar A. Jaro of Imus, Cavite.

Based on your letter, your query is whether or not Mayor Jaro, who later on won in the two (2) election protests, may still recover the salaries appurtenant to said office during the time that the same was held by Engr. Homer T. Saquilayan, the person who had been proclaimed as winner and had initially assumed said office but was later ousted as a result of the election protests.

In reply to your query, we answer in the negative.

Well-settled is the rule that a person acquires public office either by appointment or by election. An appointment is the act or designation by the executive officer, board or body to where that power has been delegated, of the individual who is to exercise the functions of a given office (Mechem, Section 102). On the other hand, an election 'invites the choice or selection of candidates to public office by popular vote through the use of the ballot, and the elected officials are determined through the will of the electorate. An election is the embodiment of the popular will, the expression of the sovereign power of the people. The winner is the candidate who has obtained a majority or plurality of valid votes cast in the election' (Rulloda vs. COMELEC, G.R. No. 154198, January 20, 2003).

There are instances however where one's acquisition of right or title to such public office would be challenged or questioned thereby giving rise to multiple and repetitious suits. In order to protect the public by insuring the orderly functioning of the government despite allegations of defect in title to office of the public officers, there is the so-called de jure doctrine/de facto doctrine in public office.

In de jure doctrine, a person has the lawful right to the office in all respects, but who has either been ousted from it, or who has never actually taken possession of it.

On the other hand, the de facto doctrine refers to the principle which holds that a person who, by the proper authority, is admitted and sworn into office is deemed to be rightfully in such office until, by judicial declaration in a proper proceeding, he is ousted therefrom, or his admission thereto is declared void (63A Am. Jur. 2d 1081 as cited in the Law on Public Officers and Election Law, de Leon and de Leon, Jr., 3rd ed., p. 106). A de facto officer is thus defined by the Supreme Court in the case of Torres vs. Ribo, 84 Phil 44, as one who has the reputation of being the officer that he assumes to be, and yet is not a good officer in point of law. He must have acted as officer for such length of time, under color of title and under such circumstances of reputation or acquiescence by the public and public authorities, as to afford a presumption of election or appointment, and induce people, without inquiry, and relying on the supposition that he is the officer he assumes to be, to submit to or invoke his action.

Based on the foregoing, we can aptly say that Mayor Jaro is a de jure officer since he, after the two election protests were decided in his favor, has the lawful right to the office in all respects, but who has either been ousted from it, or who has never actually taken possession of it in conformity with the abovementioned definition of a de jure officer. On the other hand, Engr. Saquilayan can be properly considered as a de facto officer since he, by the proper authority, is sworn to and allowed to assume the mayoralty post, and is deemed to be rightfully in such office until, by judicial declaration in a proper proceeding, he is ousted therefrom, or his admission thereto is declared void in conformity with the abovementioned definition of a de facto officer.

Coming now to your query, may we invite your attention to the pronouncements made by the Supreme Court in the cases of Rodriguez vs. Tan, 91 Phil 724 and Malaluan vs. COMELEC, G.R. No. 120193, March 6, 1996.