REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

14 March 2007

MS. MA. TERESA B. AHUNIN
Municipal Budget Officer
San Mateo, Rizal

Dear Ms. Ahunin:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion and
intervention regarding your appointment as Municipal Budget Officer of
that municipality.

You represented that on 04 January 2007, Mayor Ariel T. Diaz,
approved through Memorandum Order No. 2007-004, appointed you as Municipal
Budget Officer thereat. Consequently, pursuant to Section 443 (b) of the
Local Government Code, said appointment was indorsed to the
Sangguniang Bayan, through the Presiding Officer, for concurrence. The
appointment was then referred to the Committee on Personnel and Civil
Service for the Sangguniang Bayan for appropriate action. However, said
Committee failed to act on your appointment for three months now
despite the fact that your appointment has undergone legitimate standard
processes and all pertinent documents were submitted and complied with.
According to you, the inaction of the Committee has obviously caused the
delay and non-issuance of your appointment since concurrence is a
requisite thereto.

You, therefore, asked this Department (1) as to what legal basis,
ground or provision of law that you can invoke to compel the Chairperson
of that Committee to act on your appointment considering the long
inaction; and (2) can the Municipal Mayor take legal steps?

In reply thereto, may we invite your attention to Section 443 (d) of
the Local Government Code, which provides that:

"SEC. 443. Officials of the Municipal Government:

xxx

d) Unless otherwise provided herein, heads of
departments and offices shall be appointed by the municipal
mayor with the concurrence of the majority of all the
sangguniang bayan members, subject to civil service law,
rules and regulations. The sangguniang bayan shall act on
the appointment within fifteen (15) days from the date of its
submission; otherwise, the same shall be deemed confirmed."

On the other hand, Section 475 (a) of the Local Government Code
provides, thus:

"SEC. 475. Qualifications, Powers and Duties:- (a) No
person shall be appointed budget officer unless he is a
citizen of the Philippines, a resident of the local government
unit concerned, of good moral character, a holder of a
college degree preferably in accounting, economics, public
administration or any related course from a recognized
college or university, and a first grade civil service eligibly or
equivalent. He must have acquired experience in
budgeting or in any related field for at least five
(5) years in the case of the provincial or city budget officer,
and three (3) years in the case of the municipal budget
officer.

The appointment of a budget officer shall be
mandatory for the provincial, city, and municipal
governments."

Further, Section 475 (b) of the same Code, insofar as pertinent,
provides that "(b) The budget officer shall take charge of the budget
office and shall xxx."

Furthermore, Section 1, last paragraph, Rule IV of Civil Service
Commission Memorandum Circular No. 40, s. 1998, provides that: "in case
of local government unit appointment requiring concurrence of the
Sangguniang Bayan, effectivity thereof shall not be earlier than the date
of such concurrence". On the other hand, Section 1 (e), Rule V of the same
CSC Circular provides that "appointment in local government units for
submission to the Commission shall be accompanied, in addition to the
common requirements, by the following: xxx (iii) for appointment to
Department head; Sangguniang Resolution embodying the concurrence of
the majority of its members as provided for under Section 443 (d), RA