Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

OPINION NO.  77, S. 2007
04 September 2007

VICE MAYOR JOSE ANTONIO S. VELOSO
Tagbilaran City

Dear Vice-Mayor Veloso:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion with regard to the power of the City Vice Mayor to appoint casual employees in the Sangguniang Panlungsod in the light of the Supreme Court ruling in the case of Atienza vs. Villarosa (G.R. No. 161081, 10 May 2005).

In reply thereto, may I respectfully invite your attention to the following provisions of the Local Government Code of 1991 RA 7160):

"Section 455. The Chief Executive Powers, Duties and Compensation.- xxx
(b) xxx, the City Mayor shall:
xxx xxx xxx
(v) Appoint all officials and employees whose salaries and wages are wholly or mainly paid out of city funds and whose appointments are not otherwise provided for in this Code, as well as those he may be authorized by law to appoint."

"Section 456. The Powers, Duties and Compensation.- (a) The City Vice Mayor shall:
xxx xxx xxx
(2) Subject to civil service law, rules and regulations, appoint all officials and employees of the sangguniang panlungsod, except those whose manner of appointment is specifically provided in this Code."

In the case of Atienza vs. Villarosa (G.R. No. 161081, 10 May 2005), the Supreme Court ruled that:

"Thus, while the Governor has the authority to appoint officials and employees whose salaries are paid out of the provincial funds, this does not extend to the officials and employees of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan because such authority is lodged with the Vice Governor. In the same manner, the authority to appoint casual job order employees of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan belongs to the Vice-Governor.

The authority of the Vice-Governor to appoint officials and employees of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan is anchored on the fact that these employees are derived from the budget source of their salaries is employees and officials of the Sanggunian apart from the other officials of the province. Accordingly, the power of the Vice-Governor is limited to those employees of the Sanggunian Panlalawigan, as well as those of the office of the Vice-Governor, whose salaries are paid out of the funds appropriated for the Panlalawigan. As a corollary, if the salary of an employee or official is charged against the provincial funds, even if this employee reports to the Vice-Governor or is assigned to his office, the Governor retains the authority to appoint the said employee pursuant to Section 465[b][v] of Republic Act No. 7160."

Corollary thereto, Section 77 of the Local Government Code provides that:

"Section 77. Responsibility for Human Resource and Development.- The chief executive of every local government unit shall be responsible for human resources and development in his unit and shall take all personnel actions in accordance with the Constitutional provisions on civil service, pertinent laws, and rules and regulations thereon, including such policies, guidelines and standard as the Civil Service Commission may establish: Provided, That the local chief executive may employ emergency as casual employees or laborers paid on a daily wage or piecework basis and hired through job orders for local projects authorized by the sangguniang concerned, without need of approval or attestation by the Civil Service Commission: Provided, further, That the period of employment of emergency or casual laborers as provided in this Section shall not exceed six (6) months."

In fine, the foregoing provisions of the Local Government Code and the pronouncement of the Supreme Court in the case of Atienza vs. Villarosa (Ibid) may be summarized in the following manner:

The Vice-Governor is the appointing authority for casual employees under the plantilla of the Sanggunian. He/she likewise is the appointing