Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

Francisco Gold Condominium IL EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
LE GPINKIN HG40 5  2or8

O04 June 2008

MAYOR CELSO L. LOBREGAT
Zamboanga City

Dear Mayor Lobregat:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion on the following
issues raised, to wit:

1. “Is the contention of the Sanggunian that the word
“VETO” should be written in the original copy of the
proposed ordinance itself, a requirement in the
implementation of the veto provisions in the Local
Government Code?

2. Given the fact that the Sanggunian has already
deliberated the veto on March 26, 2008 but failed to
put into votation the determination of the required
two-thirds (2/3) vote to override the same, can they
still override it later?

3. Under Section 54 (b) of the Local Government Code,
the chief executive is given a prescriptive period of
ten (10) days from receipt of the proposed ordinance
to communicate his veto to the Sanggunian. It
appears, however, that the law is silent on the
prescriptive period on the part of the Sanggunian in
overriding the same. As such, what is the
prescriptive period for the Sanggunian to override
the veto of the City Mayor, if any? Are there any
laws, rules and regulations or jurisprudence which
provides for such prescriptive period?”

~2-

In reply to your first query, may we invite your attention to Section 54
(a) and (b) and Section 55 (a), both of the Local Government Code, which
provide:

“SEC, 54. Approval of Ordinances.- (a) Every
ordinance enacted by the sangguniang panlalawigan,
sangguniang panlungsod, or sangguniang bayan shall
be presented to the provincial governor or city or
municipal mayor, as the case may be. If the local chief
executive concerned approves the same, he shail affix
his signature on each and every page thereof;
otherwise, he shall veto it and return the same with his
objections to the sanggunian, which may proceed to
reconsider the same. The sanggunian concerned may
override the veto of the local chief executive by two-
thirds (2/3) vote of all its members, thereby making the
ordinance or resolution effective for all legal intents
and purposes.

(b) The veto shall be communicated by the local
chief executive concerned to the sanggunian within
fifteen (15) days in the case of a province, and ten (10)
days in the case of a city or @ municipality, otherwise,
the ordinance shall be deemed approved as if he had
signed it.”

“SEC. 55. Veto Power of the Local Chief
Executive.- (a) The local chief executive may veto any
ordinance of the sangguniang pantalawigan,
sangguniang pantungsod, or sangguniang bayan on the

ground that it is ultra vires or prejudicial to the public
welfare, stating his reasons therefor in writing.”

A veto is defined as “the refusal of assent by the executive
officer whose assent is necessary to perfect a law which has been
passed by the legislative body and the message which is usually
sent to such body by the executive, stating such refusal and the
reasons therefor” (Black's Law Dictionary, 5 Ed., 1985).

Under Section 54 of the Local Government Code, the grant of the veto
power to a City Mayor confers upon him an authority beyond the simple

3»

mechanical act of signing an ordinance, as a requisite to its approval. Such
power accords the City Mayor the discretion to approve an ordinance in the
first instance or to veto it and retum it with his objections to the
Sanggunian, which may proceed to reconsider the same.

Under Section 54 (a) of the same Code, if the City Mayor approves a
proposed ordinance, he shall affix his signature in each and every page
thereof; otherwise he shall veto it and return the same with his objections to
the Sanggunian. Corollarily, Section 55 (a) of the Code requires that the
veto shall be in writing, stating the reasons of his non-assent to the
proposed ordinance on the ground that it is ultra vires or prejudicial to
public welfare.

It is clear, therefore, that to veto an ordinance is a separate act of the
local chief executive apart from the act of retuming the proposed ordinance
to the Sangagunian. The exercise of the veto power by the City Mayor would
require a veto message in writing, stating the reasons for his objections to
the proposed ordinance. Precisely, Section 54 (b) of the Code requires that
the veto, definitely referring to the veto message in writing, shall be
communicated by the local chief executive concerned to the Sanggunian
within ten (10) days in the case of a city; otherwise, the ordinance shall be
deemed approved as if he had signed it.

The contention, therefore, of the Sanggunian that the word “veto”
should have been written in the original copy of the proposed ordinance
itself as required by the veto provision of the Local Government Code is
eyroneous. ‘The veto power of the City Mayor is complete and dily exercised
when he communicated his written veto message to the Sanggunian coupled
with the act of retwning the proposed ordinance unsigned. The Local
Government Code or its Implementing Rules and Kegulations does not
require that the word veto be written in the original copy of the proposed
ordinance, as precisely a veto message is a separate document
communicated to the Sanggunian, together with the unsigned proposed
ordinance, that would guide the Sanggunian in proceeding whether to
override the veto or not.

In reply to your second and third queries, may we note that the Local
Govemment Code did not provide for a prescriptive period within which for
the Sanggunian to override a particular veto of the local chief executive. We

An

have also not yet encountered any law or jurisprudence that provides for the
same. We, however, believe that as an incident to the delegated legislative
power of the present Sanggunian, the time to exercise the power to override
a veto is subsumed with the corresponding term of the Sanggunian
concemed.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

y
AUSTERE A. rereary ff p/

Acting Secretary
Legal:20;43/La
ie

cc: Director Loreto T. Bhagwani
DILG Regional Office No. IX
Zamboanga City

