Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 36, S. 2005

July 14, 2005

DIR. LEONILO B. LARIOSA
DILG-Region IV-A (CALABARZON)
Calderon Building, 827 EDSA
Barangay South Triangle, Quezon City

Sir:

This pertains to your letter requesting for a clarification on whether or not collateral heirs (brothers and sisters) mentioned under Article 1003 and Article 1004 of the New Civil Code can claim the same benefits in the absence of the legal heirs due to death or loss of contact considering that a collateral heir is not mentioned in the said circular.

For better appreciation, may we invite your attention to the following provisions of law which provide for the parameters that should guide you in the entitlement of the death benefits.

Section 393 (b)(2) of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) provide, among others, that the officials of the barangay, which include the Punong Barangay, the Sangguniang Barangay Members including the SK President as ex-officio member thereof, the barangay secretary and treasurer who died during their term of office may be covered by death benefits in accordance with Republic Act No. 6942 entitled: "An Act Increasing the Insurance benefits of Local Government Officials and providing funds therefore." Under RA 6942, beneficiaries of insured officials shall receive death and burial benefits in case said official dies during his incumbency.

Furthermore, pursuant to Executive Order 115 dated August 5, 2002, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo authorized the Department of the Interior and Local Government to determine the amount and administer the payment of the death benefits of barangay officials who die during their term of office. Hence, on December 26, 2002, then Secretary of DILG, Jose D. Lina, Jr. issued a Memorandum Circular No. 2002-207.

Per your letter, Rule I Section 5(3) of the said Memorandum Circular states that Legal heirs are the compulsory heirs as provided for in Article 887 of the New Civil Code. Thus, you are now in quandary on whether collateral heirs can claim the same benefits in the absence of the legal heirs considering that it is not mentioned in the said circular.

To clarify you on the matter, please be informed that in the absence of any direct compulsory heirs of the deceased, the collateral heirs (e.g. brothers, and sisters) are entitled to claim the death benefits pursuant to the rule on succession per Articles 1003 and 1004 of the New Civil Code, which respectively state that:

"Article 1003 If there are no descendants, ascendants, illegitimate children, or a surviving spouse, the collateral relatives shall succeed to the entire estate of the deceased in accordance with the following articles.

Article 1004 Should the only survivors be brothers and sisters of the full blood, they shall inherit in equal shares."

Likewise, Articles 1005-1010 of the Civil Code may also be applied should it appear that the collateral heirs mentioned above survive with other possible heirs.

Thus, premises considered, we reiterate that in facilitating and expediting the release of death benefit claims of the beneficiaries of barangay officials who died during their incumbency, Memorandum Circular No. 2002-207 is the rule on the matter. However in the absence of any provision in the above-mentioned Circular that will address the issue on heirship or similar matters, the provisions of the Civil Code apply suppletorily to clarify and give effect to said Memorandum Circular.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

ANGEL0 T. REYES
Secretary

Legal:94/cga