Republic of the Philippines

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA
cor. Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 9, S. 2005
10 February 2005

MS. EULALIA T. TALARAN
Accountant IV, OIC
Office of the Provincial Accountant
Provincial Capitol Building
Virac, Catanduanes

Dear Ms. Talaran:

This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion relative to the
legality of a Budget Ordinance allegedly passed and approved by only four
(4) members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Catanduanes through a
special session.

Per your letter, the Budget Ordinance was passed and approved by
four (4) members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Catanduanes through
a special session held on 13 March 2004, while the seven (7) other
members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan were in Manila for a luncheon
meeting with Her Excellency, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. You further
represented that the seven (7) members have no approved travel orders
from the Office of the Governor.

May we, however, note that in one of your attachments (Resolution
No. 029-2004), it appears that there were eight (8) members of the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan, including the Vice-Governor, and not seven (7),
as per your letter, who were not in the province on the day when the assailed
special session was conducted by the remaining four (4) members of the
said sanggunian.

Be that as it may, please be informed that the passage of an
ordinance involves two (2) aspects, i.e. (1) the substantive; and (2) the
procedural. The former refers to the necessity of an ordinance to comply
with the provisions of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), other
existing laws and the Constitution. The latter, in the meantime, refers to the
manner by which an ordinance has to be enacted. Any violation of these
two (2) aspects may render an ordinance invalid.

As regards the substantive aspect, the same involves a question of
law which may be validly addressed through the rendition of a legal opinion,
the latter entails only an interpretation of the provisions of the ordinance
vis-Ã -vis the laws and Constitution whereupon said ordinance should be
compliant with. Insofar as the procedural aspect is concerned, let it be
stressed that this aspect usually involves more of questions of fact, because

It involves the contemporaneous events that surrounded the
procedure/manner of the passage of the ordinance. Sometimes, a necessity
of factual determination as to the proper procedure undertaken in the
passage of a particular ordinance would become imperative if the matter is
timely raised by any proper party. In such a case, the aid of the court to
resolve the issue has to be implored since this Department, not being a
court, is not empowered to adjudicate factual issues.

Be that as it may, for whatever guidance it may serve, we wish to
inform you that in Gamboa, Jr. vs. Aguirre, Jr., 310 SCRA 867, the Supreme
Court here resolved that a mayor who was out of the country is considered
"effectively absent" as he cannot exercise the powers and prerogatives of
his office abroad. This also creates a temporary vacancy in the office of the
mayor and the vice-mayor is allowed to discharge the duties of the mayor
during the latter's absence.

While admittedly in Gamboa, Jr. vs. Aguirre, Jr., supra, the mayor was
abroad, in the case of Paredes vs. Antillon, 3 SCRA 662, the Supreme Court
had a chance to pass upon the prior case of Grapilon vs. Municipality of
Caglaria, Leyte, G.R. No. L-12347, 30 May 1961, wherein a Leyte mayor
traveled to Manila to transact official business. The Court resolved that a
mayor traveling within the Philippines but outside the territorial jurisdiction
of his municipality is considered as not being effectively absent if the travel
is official because he can still exercise the powers and prerogatives of his
office. The reverse should necessarily be true. If the travel outside of his
local government unit is unofficial or private, the traveling local chief
executive is deemed to be effectively absent because he cannot exercise
the powers and prerogatives of his office precisely due to the private nature
of his travel. In this specific case, the powers and prerogatives of his office
remain within the territorial bounds of his local government unit.

Moreover, in Avelino vs. Cuenco (83 Phil. 17), the Supreme Court
excluded a Member of the Senate in the determination of quorum for the
reason that said Senator was in the United States and, therefore, outside the
coercive jurisdiction of the Senate.

Foregoing doctrines considered, this Department through DILG
Opinion No. 27, s. 2004, once opined that if we were to apply the three (3)
Supreme Court doctrines, i.e., Gamboa, Jr. vs. Aguirre, Jr. (310 SCRA 867);
Paredes vs. Antillon (3 SCRA 662); and Grapilon vs. Municipality of
Leyte (2 SCRA 103), an effectively absent member (the City Councilor) "is
not considered in the determination of the basis for the quorum of said
body" as the travel outside his city which is not on official business may be
considered as disabling himself from acting on official and business
transactions of his office.

Corollary thereto, Section 53 (b) of RA 7160 refers to the power of the
Presiding Officer to "compel the immediate attendance of any member
absent without justifiable cause by designating a member of the sanggunian,