Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Magpamahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY
April 11, 2008
MR. ROTILLO P. MANERA
Gumarueng, Piat
Cagayan
Dear Mr. Manera:
This pertains to your letter seeking our legal opinion or guidance on the following matters, viz:
1. Per your letter, you have filed a "Petition for an Independent Review and Audit in the Local Government Unit of Piat, Cagayan on November 2007". The purpose of the audit is to let you know, be informed and be familiarized with the fiscal and administrative matters to your barangay pursuant to laws and legal orders.

In addition thereto, you came to this office and clarified verbally regarding the first query, whether or not you and your fellow constituents in the barangay concerned have the right to request for an independent review for audit.

2. You also requested this office for guidelines and brief explanation/orientation of the provisions of laws or orders on the following:

a) appointments of appointive barangay employees.

b) How to actively participate in the barangay affairs in order to put a sound perspective of your barangay as potent institution?

c) Holding of barangay assembly and corresponding sanctions for failure to conduct the same;

d) Failure to publish administrative matters and monetary considerations for purposes of transparency and its sanctions for non-compliance.

e) Paragraph 3, Section 1, Article I of DILG Memorandum Circular No. 2002-150 dated September 8, 2002, re: Degrees of relationship.

f) Participation of non-government organizations in the affairs of the Local Government Unit most particularly on the local bodies like the Barangay Development Council wherein an NGO can form part of the Local Development Programs.

With regard to your first concern, may we advise you to file the said Petition to the Commission on Audit as it is the Commission which is conferred by the Constitution the exclusive authority to conduct audit review on all transactions of government agencies, including those of local government units and render its official findings thereon.

With respect to your second concern, please find attached DILG Memorandum Circular 2002 - 150 which up to present is still applicable.

May it be emphasized, however, that while the power to concur is given to the Sangguniang Barangay, said body is not vested with so much plenary discretionary powers. The power to concur is intended for the Sangguniang to determine whether or not the appointee of the Punong Barangay possesses all the qualifications prescribed for barangay officials as prescribed in the Local Government Code and other existing laws, such as relative within the fourth civil degree; previously removed from government service for cause; and other grounds. If the appointee, therefore possesses all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications provided for by law, then the Sangguniang Barangay has no other far-reaching powers except to issue that concurrence. Exceeding that limitation, the Sangguniang barangay would already be in effect exercising the appointing authority and prerogatives of a Punong Barangay, who is vested the power by the Local Government Code to appoint barangay officials.

Accordingly, if the Sangguniang Barangay should exceed its power in exercising its power of concurrence, meaning, the non-concurrence was exercised whimsically, arbitrarily and without basis in fact and law, then they may be opening themselves to possible criminal, administrative and civil cases that may be filed against them. On the other hand, if Punong Barangay also appoints somebody who is not qualified or possesses other grounds for disqualifications, he is also vulnerable to an administrative case of abuse of authority or criminal case under the Revised Penal Code for issuing illegal appointments or under Section 3(e) of Republic Act 3019 otherwise known as "Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act".

With regard to your third concern, please be informed that you can actively participate in the barangay affairs as a constituent of the said barangay. In this regard, please note section 398 of the Local Government Code which provides that:

"Section 398. Powers of the Barangay Assembly. - The Barangay Assembly shall:

a) Initiate legislative processes by recommending to the sangguniang barangay the adoption of measures for the welfare of the barangay and the city or municipality concerned;

b) Decide on the adoption of initiative as a legal process whereby the registered voters of the barangay may directly propose, enact, or amend any ordinance; and

c) Hear and pass upon the semestral report of the sangguniang barangay concerning its activities and finances.

- It is clear from the above-ended provision that any registered voter of the barangay can participate in the legislative process, and can directly propose, enact or amend any ordinance and hear and pass semestral report.

Ament you fourth concern, please be informed that Section 397 of the Local Government Code provides the mandatory provision regarding the holding of barangay assembly. It states that:

"Section 397. Composition; Meetings. - (a) There shall be a barangay assembly composed of all persons who are actual residents of the barangay for at least six (6) months, fifteen (15) years of age over, citizens of the Philippines, and duly registered in the list of barangay assembly members.

(b) The barangay assembly shall meet at least twice a year to hear and discuss the semestral report of the sangguniang barangay concerning its activities and finances as well as problems affecting the barangay. Its meetings shall be held upon call of the punong barangay or of at least four (4) members of the sangguniang barangay, or upon written petition of at least five percent (5%) of the assembly members.