Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City
OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 40
May 2, 2007

DIRECTOR CARLOS T. DERECHO
DILG
Caraga Region, Butuan City

Dear Dir. Derecho:

This pertains to your request for legal opinion on who are the legal heirs entitled to claim the terminal leave benefits of the late LGOO VIII Sergio M. Macas of Agusan del Sur.

Please be informed that as shown in the records attached to your letter, there is a controversy as to the status of the marriage of Sergio Macas to the mother of Melina Macas Sibay and the mother of Genesis Antoniette Buenavista Macas and Anton Serge Buenavista Macas.

It appears that Sergio Macas and Linda L. Buenavista, the supposed second wife, were married in accordance with the Muslim rites, traditions, customs and beliefs under the Islamic Shariah Law. However, there was also a certification issued by the Clerk of Court and Circuit Registrar that no record of Conversion to Islam of Sergio M. Macas has been filed and registered in the said court. If the latter fact indeed exists, then, Sergio Macas, not being a Muslim cannot validly be married under Muslim rites.

In the event that Sergio Macas was first married to the mother of Melina Macas-Sibay, his subsequent marriage to Linda Buenavista without first being converted into the Muslim faith may technically be considered under the Revised Penal Code as a bigamous marriage. Correspondingly, a bigamous marriage is, under the law, a void marriage. However, this Department is without authority to make such adjudication.

Such being the case, if Sergio Macas was never converted into the Muslim faith, his children from his second marriage shall be considered illegitimate children pursuant to the Family Code of the Philippines, thereby making the said children entitled to only one-half (1/2) of the share of the legitimate children from Sergio's estate. Article 176 of the Family Code specifically provides that:

"xxx The legitime of each illegitimate child shall consist of one-half of the legitime of a legitimate child." 

On the other hand, Linda, the wife from a supposed bigamous marriage cannot claim from the estate of Sergio as she cannot be considered a legal heir.

Let it be noted at this juncture that this position taken by the Department is subject to whatever ruling/s the court may have as to the validity or otherwise of Sergio Macas' two marriages.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
OIC Undersecretary for Legal Government