Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A. Francisco Gold Condominium II Bldg, EDSA
corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

February 20, 2008

ATTY. MARC R.M. NAVARRO
25 C Perpetual Drive, Sta. Teresita Village
Malanday, Marikina City

Dear Atty. Navarro:

This refers to your letter dated October 22, 2007 seeking our opinion
on whether or not a cooperative is exempt from paying local taxes and other
charges.

As per your letter, the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Marikina City
enacted Ordinance 165 series of 2004, exempting cooperatives only from
certain fees imposed by the city government, except cooperatives with net
assets of more than P10,000,000.00. Because of this, Barangay Credit
Cooperative (BCC) was assessed of local taxes and/or fees for business and
building permits and other charges. BCC paid but the same was made
under protest because it believed that, as a duly registered cooperative, it
should have been exempted from all local taxes and other charges. You
now seek our opinion on the said issue.

In response thereto, please be informed that in DILG Opinion No. 37,
series of 2007 dated April 23, 2007, we opined that cooperatives shall be
exempt from payment of local taxes, fees or charges imposed by provinces,
cities, municipalities and barangays, provided that these
cooperatives are duly registered under RA 6810 otherwise known as An Act
Establishing the Magna Carta for Countryside and Barangay Business
Enterprises, Granting Exemptives for any and all Government Rules,
Regulations and other Incentive and Benefits therefore, and for other
purposes and RA 6938 or the Cooperative Code of the Philippines. We
found basis in Section 133(n) of the Local Government Code of 1991, which
reads:

"Section 133. Common limitations on the Taxing Powers of
Local Government Units. - Unless otherwise provided herein, the
exercise of the taxing powers of provinces, cities, municipalities,
and barangays shall not extend to the levy of the following:

(n) Taxes, fees or charges, on Countryside and Barangay
Business Enterprises and cooperatives duly registered under RA
6810 and Republic Act Numbered 6938, otherwise known as the
"Cooperative Code of the Philippines" respectively."

Significant from the aforementioned provision is the fact that there is no
qualification as to the kind of cooperatives that should be given an
exemption, providing only a lone condition that such cooperatives are duly
registered under Republic Act No. 6810 and RA 6938. Likewise there is no
distinction as to the local taxes, fees or charges that such cooperatives are
exempt from paying. Thus, since the law did not distinguish, the local
government unit cannot and should not also distinguish.

As per your letter, since BCC is a duly registered cooperative in
accordance with RA 6938 and 6810, we are of the view that it enjoys the
exemption of local taxes, fees and charges as mandated by the provision
cited above.

Hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

cc: DIR. ROBERTO C. ABEJERO
DILG, NCR
LMP Building, Ermin Garcia Street
Cubao, Quezon City

Legal:28/Merie