REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. FERMIN ROLLIE Z. SILANG
Chairman of the Board
Ilijan Community Development Foundation, Inc.
Barangay Ilijan, Batangas City

Dear Mr. Silang:

This pertains to your letter requesting for legal opinion on
whether or not the Local School Board of Batangas City can
appropriate funds for the school supplies of public elementary
students.

Before answering your query, allow us first to explain the
nature of the Special Education Fund (SEF) and the procedure and
manner by which the same is to be spent.

Under Section 235 of the Local Government Code, a city may
levy and collect an annual tax of one percent (1%) on the assessed
value of real property, which shall be in addition to the basic real
property tax. The proceeds thereof shall exclusively accrue to the
Special Education Fund of the city.

Corollarily, Section 309 of the Local Government Code provides
that there shall be maintained in every city treasury a Special
Education Fund, which shall consist of the respective share of the city
in the proceeds of additional tax on real property to be appropriated
for purposes prescribed in Section 272 of the Local Government
Code.

Said Section 272 of the Code, on the other hand, provides that
the proceeds from the additional one (1%) percent tax on real
property accruing to the Special Education Fund shall be allocated for
the operation and maintenance of public schools, construction and
repair of school buildings, facilities and equipment, educational
research, purchase of books and periodicals, and sports
development, as determined and approved by the Local School Board.

Relative thereto, Article 363 of the Implementing Rules and
Regulations of the Local Government Code provides that the
proceeds of the additional 1% percent real property tax accruing to
the special education fund shall be allocated as determined and
approved by the Local School Board concerned only for the following
purposes: (1) operation and maintenance of public schools; (2)
construction and repair of school buildings, facilities and equipment;
(3) educational research; (4) purchase of books and periodicals; and
(5) sports development.

As can be gleaned from the foregoing provisions of the Local
Government Code and its Implementing Rules and Regulations, the
Special Educational Fund can only be appropriated and allocated for
purposes prescribed under Section 272 of the Local Government
Code and Article 363 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of
the Local Government Code. Any deviation from the purposes
prescribed for by law under which the SEF proceeds can be
appropriated and disposed would constitute malversation of public
funds or technical malversation of public funds, as the case may be.

In reply now to your query, we are of the view that the Special
Educational Fund can be appropriated for the purchase of school
supplies of public elementary students provided that it falls under
the category of "books and periodicals" and that it has been
predetermined and approved by the Local School Board.

Hope we have guided you accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

EncL: a/s
Legal: 2843/La
cc: Director Roberto C. Abejero
DILG Region IV-A
FTI Complex, Taguig City