REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR. JOJO B. PATRON
Administrative Officer V
Office of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan
Provincial Capitol Building
Kalibo, Aklan

Dear Mr. Patron:

This refers to your letter requesting the following:

1. A copy of RA 6733, entitled: "An Act to Amend Section 21,
   Title I, Book I of the Revised Administrative Code of 1987,
   Granting Members of Both Houses of the Congress of the
   Philippines the General Authority to Administer Oaths, and
   For Other Purposes".

2. A certification stating that the Vice Governor is authorized
   to administer oath.

In reply to your first request, please find the herein attached copy of
RA 6733.

As regards your second request, may we, in lieu of a certification,
issue an opinion as to whether or not a Vice Governor can administer
oaths. Thus:

Section 2 of RA 6733 provides, thus:

"SEC. 2. Section 41 of the Administrative Code of
   1987 is hereby amended to read as follows:

   Sec. 41. Officers Authorized to Administer Oath.- The
   following officers have general authority to administer
oaths: President; Vice President; Members and Secretaries of
both Houses of the Congress; Members of the Judiciary;
Secretaries of Departments; provincial governors and
lieutenant-governors; city mayors; municipal mayors; bureau
directors; regional directors; clerks of courts; registrars of
deed; other civilian officers in the public service of the
government of the Philippines whose appointments are
vested in the President and are subject to confirmation by
the Commission on Appointments; all other constitutional
officers; and notaries public."

May it be noted that RA 6733 has enumerated the public officials who
have been given the general authority to administer oaths, including, inter
alia, the provincial governor and lieutenant-governor. Particular attention
is invited to the term lieutenant-governor for the reason that both the old
Local Government Code (BP 337) and the Local Government Code of 1991
(RA 7160) never used such term of that of a lieutenant-governor. In fact,
both laws make mention of the term Vice Governor. Hence, there would
now appear an enigma as to how to treat the term lieutenant-governor.

A "lieutenant" has been defined as "a person who acts in place of
a superior when the latter is not present" (Sibal, Philippine Legal
Encyclopedia, p. 520). Ergo, the above definition will lead to the
inescapable conclusion that the term "lieutenant-governor" refers to the
Vice Governor.

Parenthetically, a Vice Governor's general duty in both BP 337 and
RA 7160 is to succeed either permanently or temporarily, the Governor in
the event the latter becomes incapacitated also either permanently or
temporarily to perform his functions.

If we were to interpret solely the definition of "lieutenant" vis-Ã -vis
the function of a lieutenant or vice governor, it would then appear that a
lieutenant or vice-governor may only administer oaths if his/her superior,
i.e., the governor is not available to perform such function. However, a
careful reading of RA 6733 would reveal that the conjunctive word "and"
separates the terms provincial governors and lieutenant governors.

Oft repeated in many jurisprudential pronouncements is the rule of
statutory construction that "words in a statute should generally be
given their ordinary or visual meaning; they should not be given a
strict or limited signification in the absence of a legislative intent
to that effect" (Central Azucadera Don Pedro vs.
Central Bank, 104 SCRA 598).