REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DILG OPINION NO. 113, S. 2007
05 December 2007

MAYOR MARYNETTE ROMERO-GAMBOA
Dingras, Ilocos Norte

Dear Mayor Gamboa:

This pertains to your query in relation to the conduct of the Liga ng mga Barangay municipal chapter election of officers. Your would like to be enlightened on whether or not the oath of office as Punong Barangay can be a valid substitute to the requirement found under Section 1.1.1, Article IV of the 2002 Election Code of the Liga ng mga Barangay, which requires the presentation of credentials, such as a certified true copy of the COMELEC Certificate of Canvass and Proclamation of the Winning Candidates as Punong Barangay.

As a backgrounder, you stated that the duly elected Punong Barangay resigned from office and through succession, the 1st Barangay Kagawad assumed and took his oath of office as Punong Barangay. You are now in a quandary since the Certificate of Canvass and Proclamation issued by the COMELEC to the 1st Barangay Kagawad declared him as 1st Barangay Kagawad, and not as Punong Barangay.

May we note that pursuant to Section 491 of the Local Government Code, the Liga ng mga Barangay is an organization of all barangays. The latter are simply acting as the representatives of their respective barangays in the Liga. This is clearly elucidated in Section 492 of the same Code where it is provided that every barangay shall be represented in said Liga by the Sanggunian member duly elected for the purpose among its members.

However, notwithstanding the express provision of the law, it is quite disturbing that the Liga ng mga Barangay, in their Constitution and By Laws and their Election Code, required that for the Liga members to participate in the Liga municipal chapter election of officers, they should be possessed of a COMELEC Certificate of Canvass and Proclamation of Winning Candidates as Punong Barangay, which could simply mean that it is required that the Liga member is a "duly elected Punong Barangay".

While it is true that Section 509 of the Local Government Code empowers the Liga ng mga Barangay to adopt its Constitution and By Laws which shall govern their internal organization and operation, the same provision, however, qualified such power by stating that "Provided, That said Constitution and By Laws shall always conform to the provisions of the Constitution and existing laws".

Accordingly, notwithstanding the provisions of the Constitution and By Laws of the Liga ng mga Barangay and its Election Code, we are of the view that a Punong Barangay, whether by election or by succession, is entitled, pursuant to Section 492 of the Local Government Code, to represent the barangay in the Liga Chapter. This has to be so in order that the barangay concerned shall not be deprived of its representative in the Liga. Hence, any proof of assumption to the position of Punong Barangay, such as an oath of office as Punong Barangay after assuming said position by succession or by operation of law, would suffice to enable the said Punong Barangay to participate in the Liga chapter elections.

We hope we have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

Legal:43/La

cc: Director Manuel V. Biason
DILG Regional Office No. 01
San Fernando City, La Union

Director John M. Castañeda
National Barangay Operations Office
This Department