Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magpahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MAYOR ALDRIN R. GARVIDA
Nueva Era, Ilocos Norte

Dear Mayor Garvida:

This has reference to your earlier letter requesting permission from
the Honorable Secretary so that you may continue extending your notarial
services for free within that municipality in view of the unavailability of
other lawyers thereat who may extend such service.

Please be informed that this Department is bereft of any authority in
granting you permission to practice your profession as a lawyer,
specifically that of extending notarial services.

Along this line, may we invite your attention to paragraphs (a) and
(c), Section 90 of the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160), which
provide and we quote:

"(a) All governors, city and municipal mayors
are prohibited from practicing their profession or
engaging in any occupation other than the exercise of
their functions as local chief executives.

xxx xxx xxx

(c) Doctors of medicine may practice their
profession even during official hours of work only on
occasions of emergency: Provided, That the officials
concerned do not derive monetary compensation
therefrom." (Emphasis Supplied)

The foregoing provisions notwithstanding, Section 7 (b) of Republic
Act No. 6713 (Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials
and Employees) mandates, in part, that:

"SEC. 7. Prohibited Acts and Transactions.- In
addition to acts and omissions of public officials and
employees now prescribed in the Constitution and
existing laws, the following shall constitute prohibited
acts and transactions of any public official and
employee and are hereby declared to be unlawful:

xxx xxx xxx"

(b) Outside employment and other activities
related thereto.- Public officials xxx during their
incumbency, shall not:

(2) Engage in any private practice of
their profession unless authorized by the
Constitution or law, provided that such
practice will not conflict or tend to conflict
with their official functions; xxx"

Clearly, the aforequoted provisions prohibit local chief executives
like you from practicing your profession or engage in any other occupation
and this disqualification is absolute. The rationale behind this absolute
disqualification is that as local chief executive, you do not observe regular
office hours as your entire time is (and should always) be at the disposal of
the government and your constituents whom you have vowed to serve.
The sole exception is for doctors of medicine, but only in times of
emergency and without deriving any monetary compensation therefor.

We hope that we have addressed your concern accordingly.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

Legal/17

cc: Director Manuel V. Biason
DILG Regional Office No. 01
San Fernando City, La Union