Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT

November 12, 2007

MAYOR FERDINAND R. MALIWANAG
Candelaria, Quezon

Dear Mayor Maliwanag,

This pertains to your letter requesting for legal opinion on the queries, which we hereunder quoted in toto, viz:

1. "Whether or not the Municipal Mayor can officially perform as chairman of the said activity;"

2. Whether or not the Municipal Mayor can sign the solicitation/sponsorship letters as chairman or whether such letters can be noted appropriately;

3. Whether or not the Municipal Mayor can allocate and/or use public funds for special activities as such."

Your aforesaid letter was prompted by your appointment as the Overall Chairman of the Candle Festival, a festivity of the Roman Catholic Church in honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary, in your municipality.

As to your first query, we do not find any impropriety or illegality in said appointment. The law only prohibits local elective officials from appointment or designation in any capacity to any other public office or position during his tenure. (Section 94, RA 7160)

As to your second query, please note of the following provisions of RA No. 6713 (Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees), to wit:

"Section 7 (d) Prohibited Acts and Transactions - xxx, the following shall constitute prohibited acts and transactions of any public official and employee and are hereby declared to be unlawful:

a) Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. Public officials and employees shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, gratuity, favor, entertainment, loan or anything or monetary value from any person in the course of their official duties or in connection with any operation being regulated by, or any transaction which may be affected by the functions of their office."

Corollary thereto, the Department of Justice clarified the aforementioned provision in its Opinion No. 051, s. 1999, thus:

"Section 7 (d) of RA 6713, the prohibited act (i.e. solicitation or acceptance of gifts) declared to be unlawful in said provision refers to an act committed by a public official in his personal or private capacity although arising from or connected with the performance of his official duty." (emphasis ours)

It is our view that if you sign the said solicitation letter, whether as Mayor or as a Catholic devotee, the same would already constitute a violation of Section 7 (d) of RA 6713. This is even true if you simply note the same since your notation thereto may be taken as an indirect use of the influence of your office as Mayor.

As to your third query, please note of the provisions of Section 6, Article II of the Constitution "The separation of Church and State shall be inviolable". This is reinforced by Section 29 (2), Article VI of the Constitution, to wit:

"No public money or property shall be appropriated, applied, paid, or employed, directly or indirectly, for the use, benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian institution, or system of religion, or of any priest, preacher, minister, or other religious teacher, or dignitary as such, except when such priest, preacher, minister, or dignitary is assigned to the armed forces, or to any penal institution, or government orphanage or leprosarium." (underlining ours)

Therefore, since allocation and/or use of public funds for your Candle Festival in your municipality is not among the exceptions mentioned in the Constitution, the allocation or use of local public funds would be in violation of the Constitution.

We hope to have enlightened you on the matter.

Very truly yours,

AUSTERE A. PANADERO
Undersecretary

Legal: 10/em
cc: Director Roberto C. Abejero
DILG Region IV-A
FTI Complex, Taguig City