REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

MR. ROLANDO S. BOMBIO
City Planning and Development Coordinator
City Hall, San Pablo City

Dear Mr. Bombio:

This pertains to your letter requesting the Department's legal opinion
relative to your query, which we shall quote hereinbelow in full for easy
reference, viz:

"In as much as the Department of Interior and Local
Government jointly with the Department of Budget and
Management is the agency that issues the Guidelines on the
Appropriation and Utilization of the 20% of the Annual Internal
Revenue Allotment (IRA) for Development Projects of LGUs, this
representation wishes to be guided on the proper treatment of the
unexpended allotments in the Annual Development Plan on the
basis of existing rules and regulations. Simply stated, we wish to
be clarified if the unexpended balance of the Annual Development
Plan for the past year(s) may be lumped together under Continuing
Appropriation or if its aggregate may be used for funding of new
projects for the ensuing year. Related clarifications thereto are
also requested."

In reply thereto, allow us first to quote Section 322 of the Local
Government Code, to wit:

"SEC. 322. Reversion of Unexpended Balances of
Appropriations, Continuing Appropriations. - Unexpended
balances of appropriations authorized in the annual
appropriations ordinance shall revert to the unappropriated
surplus of the general fund at the end of the fiscal year and shall
not thereafter be available for expenditure except by subsequent
enactment. However, appropriations for capital outlays shall
continue and remain valid until fully spent, reverted or the project
is completed. Reversions of continuing appropriations shall not be
allowed unless obligations therefor have been fully paid or
otherwise settled."

In connection therewith, Section 308 of the same Code defined
"general fund" as follows:

"SEC. 308. Local Funds.- Every local government unit shall
maintain a General Fund which shall be used to account for such
monies and resources as may be received by and disbursed from the
local treasury. The General Fund shall consist of monies and
resources of the local government which are available for the
payment of expenditures, obligations or purposes not specifically
declared by law or accruing and chargeable to, or payable from,
any other fund."

On the other hand, Section 306, paragraphs (d) and (e), defined
"capital outlays" and "continuing appropriations" as follows:

"Capital Outlays" refers to appropriations for the purchase
of goods and services, the benefits of which extend beyond the
fiscal year and which add to the assets of the local government
unit concerned, including investments in public utilities, such as
public markets and slaughterhouses."

"Continuing Appropriations" refers to an appropriation
available to support obligations for a specified purpose or projects,
such as those for the construction of physical structures or for the
acquisition of real property or equipment, even when these
obligations are incurred beyond the budget year."

Hence, as clearly provided for under the aforementioned Section 322 of

the Code, unexpended balances of appropriations in the annual
appropriations ordinance shall revert to the unappropriated surplus of the
general fund at the end of the fiscal year and shall not thereafter be available
for expenditure except by subsequent enactment, meaning, the unexpended
balance shall again form part of the general fund to be covered by the annual
appropriations or any supplemental budget.