REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Mapagkamaal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

Opinion No. 102, s. 2007
09 November 2007

MS. MARIE ANTOINETTE S. MENDOZA
Barangay Blue Ridge A
Quezon City

Dear Ms. Mendoza:

This pertains to your letter requesting our legal opinion on the following matters, which we hereunder quote, to wit:

"1. What is the status of the personnel hired by the previous Council?

a. Do they have security of tenure?

b. If we choose nor to rehire them, are we obligated to give them separation and/or retirement pay?

c. Are there contractual and permanent barangay employees?

d. Are barangay employees civil service eligible and conversely, are they required to be civil service eligible?

2. With regard to the Barangay Budget, will the 2008 budget already to be in place or are we allowed to prepare a new budget, subject of course, to the provisions of the law?

3. Are the following changes in the budget allowed by law?

a. Reducing the number of BPSOs without changing the compensation of each BPSO

b. Increasing the number of BPSOs and reducing the compensation of each to comply with compensation requirements of the Local Government Code

c. Reducing the number of personnel and what happens to budget allocated for such personnel

d. Are there specific amounts or percentages which must be allocated apart from the compensation requirement of 55% maximum?

e. Is it possible to give a higher compensation to barangay employees than the Chairman and Kagawads to attract better workers and at the same time, comply with the 55% cap requirement of the law?

f. Can savings from allocated expenses be used for other purposes within the same fiscal year?"

4. What are the official committees?

In reply to your query no. 1, please be informed that under Article 118 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code, the mandatory appointive barangay officials are the Barangay Secretary and the Barangay Treasurer. In addition thereto, there shall also be Barangay Tanod Brigades which shall not be more than 20 in each barangay, as provided for under Section 393 of the Local Government Code.
On top of these appointive barangay officials, the barangay, pursuant to Section 387 (b) of the same Code, may also create such other positions or offices as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of the barangay government. The creation has to be done by way of an ordinance providing therein the qualification standards and compensation for the newly created positions.

In an Opinion dated 28 July 1998 addressed to then DILG Legal