REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA cor. Magapamahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

23 November 2007

MS. PRECILA O. ACABADO, et al.
NUP of Directorate for Intelligence
PNP National Headquarters
Camp Crame, Quezon City

Gentlemen/Ladies:

This refers to your Petition cum letter dated 21 September 2007. In
that letter, you requested for the Department’s opinion on the following
issues, viz:

1. Whether or not the non-uniformed personnel of the Directorate for Intelligence, PNP are entitled to receive 
longevity pay pursuant to existing laws and jurisprudence.

2. Whether or not the legal opinions which become the basis for the stoppage/cancellation of the longevity pay are
correct based on proper interpretation of the law.

3. Whether or not the cancellation of longevity pay of subject PNP personnel violates the "principle of non-diminution of
pay".

4. Whether or not RA 6975 or RA 8551 repealed PD 337.

The foregoing set of questions were precipitated by an opinion of the
Legal Service of the PNP to the effect that:

"1. Civilian agents of the CIS and the Intelligence
Service/Units of the AFP who were absorbed in the
PNP upon the effectivity of RA No. 6975 on
January 2, 1991 could simultaneously be paid

long pay and one step salary increment pursuant
to PD No. 337 and RA No. 6758, respectively;

2. However, those NUP who have been appointed
after the creation of the PNP, even if they are
holding the position of civilian agents under the
PNP plantilla, could not be paid long pay
pursuant to PD 337 since this law applies only to
civilian agents of the CIS and the Intelligence
Service/Units of the AFP and not to PNP. They are,
however, entitled to step salary increment
pursuant to RA No. 6758."

At the outset, it is imperative to trace the grant of longevity pay
under PD 337. The grant of longevity pay was embodied under the 7th
paragraph of PD 337 issued by then President Ferdinand E. Marcos when
the latter was exercising full legislative powers under the 1973
Constitution. Said paragraph provides:

"Civilian investigation agents of the Criminal
Investigation Service, Philippine Constabulary, whose
powers and duties are defined under Republic Act
Numbered five thousand seven hundred fifty, and
civilian intelligence agents of the Intelligence
Service/Units, Armed Forces of the Philippines shall
receive, in addition to their basic monthly salary,
longevity pay equivalent to ten per centum of their
latest monthly salary for every five years of continuous
service with the Criminal Investigation Service and the
Intelligence Service/Units, as the case may be:
Provided, That in the determination of their length of
service for purposes of this Decree, only uninterrupted
and continuous service with the Criminal Investigation
Service or Intelligence Service/Units, as military or
civilian intelligence agents shall be considered:
Provided, further, That the longevity pay of the civilian
investigation agents and the civilian intelligence agents
shall not exceed fifty per centum of their basic salary."

When the PNP Law (RA 6975) took effect, the Philippine
Constabulary-Integrated National Police (PC), ceased to exist as a result of